Their submission I see is to
lobby group think clearly.
Obvious that.
Grab a seat, please. Um, we've got, uh,
10 minutes set aside for your submission on the bill.
I'll let you know when there's a minute to go.
Um, but please leave some time for questions.
The floor is all.
Uh, good morning. Um, ladies
and gentlemen, thank you for the opportunity to, uh,
present to you today.
Um, what we're going to discuss, um,
it's completely new material.
Um, it's, uh, a major omission from, um,
our written submission.
Um, and it concerns the, um, uh, bill's, amendments
to the provision of, uh, long-term insights briefings.
Um, we have found those very useful.
There's a lot of important information there.
It's a sort of material that's useful for government
and opposition policy makers.
Uh, and we definitely want to see, um, the,
the proposals removed from the bill
and we've got, um, a possible solution,
um, uh, as well.
But, um, uh, my colleague Austin ING
and Banks here, who's a researcher
with the Taxpayers Union picked up the admission, um,
in our submission, unfortunately
after it was submitted, so he can talk
to you in more detail, um, about what,
what we think in that, in that space.
Austin, over to you. Uh,
good morning chair members of the committee.
Uh, as my colleague said,
I will be touching on the proposed amendments
to the long-term insights briefings
or so under the current statute
of departmental chief executives must produce,
and ultimately, once every three years, uh, two
or more may collaborate.
And these briefings provide impartial analysis
of long-term trends, risks,
and opportunities that affect New Zealand.
Uh, they're published that parliament
and the public can engage in open and informed debate.
This book changes that instead
of each department producing its own briefing,
there would be 1D PMC lead document every three years.
And we understand the motivation for this.
The government faces the difficult task
of fiscal consolidation
and the resources needed to produce the previous 19
was challenging, but in our view,
abolishing departmental responsibility altogether swings too
far the other way, and it carries
with it three notable consequences.
Firstly, it narrows the range of insights
and expertise of the public service departments.
Ministries hold deep technical knowledge about
long-term issues in their areas.
A, these perspectives a folded into one consolidated report,
the result is inevitably less detailed insights.
Secondly, it stifles democratic debate.
Opposition parties in New Zealand have very limited
resources and access to the machinery of policy advisors.
I'm sure many of you will know, play, help, play, uh,
help level of playing field in that area
by giving all parties as well as the public access
to the same objective analysis.
It's important to remember that UBS
don't provide recommendations.
They provide objective analysis, which is open to everyone.
Now, if we move to one broad report,
that resource becomes much thinner.
Finally, and as a cal, it weakens accountability.
So Treasury's 2025 briefing, for example,
highlighted enduring fiscal consequences
of the COVID-19 response analysis that might have
otherwise gone un scrutinized.
So rather than reinstating the old model
or accepting the new one,
we propose a middle ground approach in which the outer
framework is streamlined and coordinated.
DPMC must insist rather than encourages,
it currently does collaboration between departments
and these joint briefings could be organized either
sectorally, for example, economic
and fiscal policy, environmental and climate, et cetera,
or closer to the Australian model
where it's done thematically.
For example, they did, I believe it was artificial
intelligence for their first one,
although you'd have to increase the frequency if
that's, that's the road you go.
Uh, so in short, the goal should be fewer,
but better briefings, collaborative, independent,
and focused on the big issues
that shape New Zealand's future.
Thank you. Okay.
Uh, first question, Andy Foster,
thank you for the, um, for that.
There two, two questions.
First, one of them is, um, terms, thinking about going from
wide, a lot of which looked like a bit haphazardness
to some degree in the previous collection, um, to
having only one.
One of the problems we have in government often is
that there's a lot of, um, siloed thinking.
Mm-hmm. I just wonder how you, how you manage that.
And I, I guess you are, you are trying to deal with
that in a way in which you're saying, you
know, collaborate across.
Yeah. And just the second area would like
to ask you about is, do you think we've got sufficient
expectations, clear expectations of what success looks like,
the KPIs for agencies as a whole?
Um, if we give 'em a lot of money, yeah. Yes.
I, we understand that. Um, uh,
and, um, that's a big focus on our work.
Um, I don't have a question for the, an answer
for the KPI issue,
but perhaps, um, when you're looking at that, um,
siloed thinking approach, um, what we've had this year,
um, is, uh, long-term insight briefings, um,
from Inland Revenue, which is still under development, uh,
the treasury and the treasury, long-term fiscal statement.
And together as a package,
they actually really work nicely together
and painting a picture about the long-term fiscal
challenges, what the options are around, uh, revenue
and what the options might be, um, around, uh, expenditure
and changes to things like
superannuation and stuff like that.
Um, and that's the sort of, that's that sort
of thinking in different, different departments
that actually dovetails quite nicely together.
And so if DPMC could coordinate more of that,
um, we would hopefully get better coordination
amongst major, um, uh, government agencies like Treasury
and Inland Revenue, um, uh, uh, ministry
for the environment, um, the, the sub-sectors of, uh,
MB and the, like.
Celia, you, um, yesterday I was, um, interested
to meet with, um, the Welsh Commissioner for the future.
And I was just, they,
they have legislation which requires them to look at, um,
making sure that we can satisfy today's needs without, um,
limiting options in the future.
It's not exactly the word, something like that.
Um, do you see that these insights briefings are really
critical to at least having the issues out
in the public domain, if not necessarily having a government
that, um, addresses all of them?
That's exactly right. Yeah. It,
It, It provides that long-term picture,
that long-term thinking, um,
and we would expect it to be exposing issues.
Uh, the treasury stuff, for example, clearly exposes issues
that need to be addressed.
And as the secretary, uh, Ian Re was a great pains to,
to point out, admittedly,
this was the long term fiscal statement,
the sooner we take start to take action,
the less painful the adjustment's going to be.
And if I might just add briefly,
we don't have a future generations act as, as the Welsh do,
but the seem to be a manifestation of the purpose section
of the Public Service Act, which is to ensure success
of the long-term thinking in the government.
So I think you're exactly right with that.
Thank you. Thank you very much for your time.
Appreciate you coming in to join us.
Thank you very much for the time.
Think about those KPIs too.
Yeah. Uh, yes. Um, the finance
and Expend Select committee is actually looking at that too.
So putting a submission into there.
Good. We will move on to the Human Rights Commission.
Good work. And they should be joining us online.
Yeah, they're on Zoom. Fantastic.
We'll just give them a minute to pop up.
Rose, there we are. Good morning.
Thank you, uh, for joining us.
We've got 10 minutes for your, uh, submission.
I'll let you know when there's a minute to run and you,
but it'd be great if you could
leave some time for questions.
The floor is yours.
Thank you, Tim. Can I just double
check that we're in the right room?
'cause we had some trouble getting in.
Uh, is this the one on the amendments
to the public service? Uh, bill?
Yes, ma'am. Yes. Cool. Thank you.
Uh, um, thank you for the opportunity
to speak to the committee today.
So, as you mentioned, my name is Gail, uh,
professor Gail Pacheco,
the Equal Employment Opportunities Commissioner at the
New Zealand Human Rights, uh, commission, uh, te Kahui Teta,
new Zealand's National Human Rights Institution.
And with me today, I've got, um, Oliver Christella,
my senior advisor at the commission.
Our appearance today is under our statutory mandate
to promote and protect human rights in New Zealand,
including the human rights dimensions of ity or yang.
The, the objective of improving the efficiency
and effectiveness of the public service is an important
and legitimate objective.
However, uh, we believe the proposed, uh, removal
of diversity, equity,
and inclusion provisions from the ACT would in practice
undermine that actual goal.
I want to emphasize that diversity, equity,
and inclusion, DEI, is not peripheral
to a well-functioning public service.
They uphold fundamental human rights,
including the human rights dimensions of totality.
They also strengthen meritocracy
and support productivity in the workplace.
Such provisions in the Public Sector Act should
therefore be retained and strengthened and not removed.
So I have four key issues that I want to briefly go over.
Um, first, the proposed changes are inconsistent
with our international human rights obligations.
Uh, so New Zealand is a signatory
to multiple international human rights instruments
that require active measures
to eliminate discrimination in employment.
So these include the International Convention on Civil
and Political Rights,
the International Convention on the elimination of all forms
of racial discrimination, uh,
and the convention on the elimination of all forms
of discrimination against women, CO.
And these instruments require the state to take steps
to remove discrimination
and ensure the same employment
opportunities for these groups.
Um, the DEI provision set out in the ACT represent tangible
efforts to uphold these human rights, uh,
and United Nations Treaty bodies have repeatedly
encouraged New Zealand to strengthen rather than weaken
measures that promote equality and employment opportunities.
Um, so for example, uh, the 2024 concluding observations
of the CO committee commended the government's then Kia Toi
Portu action plan for reducing gender Maori Pacific
and ethnic pay gaps in the public sector.
And they recommended further
strengthening these initiatives.
Uh, similarly, the committee on the elimination
of racial discrimination call for concrete targets
to increase Maori and Pacific representation and leadership
and senior management in the public sector.
Uh, and these recommendations sit uncomfortably
with a direction currently proposed in the bill.
Um, so the removal
of DEI frameworks is a retro aggressive measure
and appears to lack the appropriate evidence base.
It's also inconsistent
with the government's commitment under the International
Covenant of Economic, social,
and Cultural rights to progressively realize those rights,
the proposed amendments of the act,
risk reversing progress towards fairness and inclusion,
and then may place New Zealand in breach
of these international obligations.
Mm-hmm. Um, the second point is
that the proposed changes are inconsistent
with the human rights dimensions of TER or Ang.
Uh, TER is a founding constitutional document
of New Zealand, and Article three requires the crown
to promote equity for Maori.
This duty not only requires the government
to prevent discrimination, but to actively advance fairness.
The removal of framework supporting DEI would likely have a
disproportionate impact on Maori undermining the crown's
responsibility to promote equitable participation
and representation within the public service.
Upholding, DEI is
therefore a necessary expression of the crown's ity
responsibilities, as well
as its broader human rights obligations.
The third point I wanna make is that the proposed changes
to the act will undermine meritocracy.
So, DEI policies are operational tools
that support a merit-based high performing workforce.
Where barriers exist
that prevent talented people from contributing
or progressing meritocracy is then compromised.
Removing DEI frameworks, risks entrenching bias,
and weakening the systems that allow talent
and skill to rise on the basis of merit.
Findings from the commission zone inquiry into, um, voices
of Pacific Peoples
and an empirical analysis done by the, uh,
the New Zealand Policy Research Institute on Pacific Maori
and ethnic pay gaps found the need for robust DEI policy.
They found that even after we controlled for education,
occupation, and other observable factors, only 27%
of the pay gap Pacific men
and 39% of the pay gap for Pacific women could be explained
by measurable characteristics.
This means that over half of these gaps were unexplained.
And the unexplained co component, while it's a makeup
of a mix of factors, likely includes discrimination
and structural bias.
Such bias, even when it's unconscious, weakens human rights
and equal employment opportunities
and undermines genuine meritocracy.
DEI policies are the mechanisms
that can correct these distortions, ensuring
that skill not circumstance, determines opportunity.
The final point I wanna make is that the bill runs counter
to the empirical evidence both internationally
and here in New Zealand, the economic
and organizational evidence is clear.
Uh, global research consistently shows
that diverse organizations perform better.
For example, a McKinsey study found companies
with greater gender diversity on executive teams
with 21% more likely to achieve, uh,
above average profitability.
And those in the top quartile for ethnic
and cultural diversity with 33% more likely
to outperform their peers.
And the same holds true in New Zealand.
My own research using two decades
of administrative data on New Zealand firms, shows a clear
and positive link between workplace diversity
and productivity growth.
And this signals that management practices
that invest in inclusion do deliver better outcomes.
So these are practical mechanisms that can help ensure
recruitment, promotion,
and pay decisions are based on merit.
So, in conclusion, uh, protecting
and strengthening the current DEI framework is essential
for protecting human rights, upholding meritocracy,
and supporting a high performing public service.
DEI policies are an evidence-based investment in better
performance and a key mechanism
through which meritocracy is realized.
For these reasons, the commission recommends
that the bill be amended to retain all provisions
that support diversity, equity,
and inclusion, including those requiring pay equity
between men and women,
and ensuring remuneration decisions are free from bias.
The Public Service Act should continue
to reinforce the principles of fairness, transparency,
and a quality of opportunity.
Um, these are principles which strengthen the performance
of the public service, and they give real effect
to New Zealand's domestic
and international human rights obligations.
Uh, Koto Koto 10.
Thank you, and happy to answer any questions.
Thank you. We have, uh, one minute left for questions.
I'm just, do you want No, no.
I, it was very clear. One if you want.
Yes, please. Only if you want to. Yeah. And Andy Foster.
Yeah. Look, thank you. Thank you very much for that.
And I completely get the, and,
and agree with every comment you've made around make sure
that there are no biases against, uh, any particular, um,
ethnicity, gender, whatever.
Um, in terms of, uh, employment,
however, looking at news, talk about meritocracy,
looking at a lot of, um, uh, vacancies over a period
of time, there are many of them which actually say, well,
look, we are actively looking for people
of particular ethnicities, uh, particular sexes, uh,
and effectively saying, if you are not one
of those, don't bother.
And I just wondered how that fits with meritocracy
and with not, um, uh, essentially not discriminating.
Now, it might be the discrimination is against a particular
group of people who are generally regarded as being, um,
overly represented, uh,
and the, the higher echelons, if you like,
but it still looks like discrimination when it basically
says, don't bother because you're the wrong ethnicity
and you're the wrong, uh, wrong gender.
Can you, how does, how does
that work from a human rights perspective?
I, I think it's important.
Well, it depends partly on the job, depending on what kind
of, uh, role it is, whether, um, for, so for instance,
I can remember roles that, um, I hired in my previous job
as a, uh, professor of economics and a research director.
And, uh, in some roles I required particular skills where,
for instance, it was working with, um, Pacific communities.
That's fine, that's fine.
I required Pacific Researchers to work
with those communities.
So in some of those kind of roles, uh, you know, that sort
of thing, uh, makes particular sense.
In, in this case, I'm talking about,
we are talking about diversity, equity,
and inclusion being part of the overall process
in determining the, alongside your skills,
education, et cetera.
So we're, we're saying it's part of the recruitment package
to ensure that we're considering those
aspects in. So, can I,
Sorry, can I, can I just, we
We're, we're, we're actually out of time, so, okay.
Sorry to interrupt.
Um, and, and I appreciate your submission.
Um, we are out of time though, so we are gonna have
to move on to the next one.
Uh, Lieutenant ura, um, we are gonna move on to,
uh, we should have,
which is the N-C-P-S-A.
Oh, look at that. Ura.
Uh, we have 10 minutes for your submission.
Uh, I'll let you know when there's a minute to run.
You might like to leave some time
for questions. Floor, is yours.
Good. Thanks, Tim. Um, my name is Mike Tanner.
Uh, I am, um,
presenting today on behalf of, uh, which is
Thea for the PSA.
Uh, and, um, it's good to see some familiar faces there.
Look, I do ap Yeah, I do apologize.
Um, we we're having, uh, our,
or someone from our committee come in, um,
but as you know, very busy public servants
and, um, it is always hard, but, um, the intent
and the content of, um, the submission, um, is something
that I can talk to as I've,
I've walked them through it as well.
Look, um, it, it's quite interesting.
I real, I, again, like you, Andy,
I I definitely support the last, um, submitter, uh,
um, very clear, very detailed.
And I, I guess what our focus here today is, um, is
around our, our workers in the, in the public service
and how this impacts them.
And on a bigger note, how it actually impacts, um, the,
the delivery of, of public services to,
uh, the people of New Zealand.
Um, we are focusing here today in,
in the submission on the impact to Maori.
So there's been a little bit of conversation in the last,
uh, submission around that.
Um, but the representation of Maori
that either work in the public service
or that are serviced by the public service, um,
have an expectation of the public service,
um, under its own tenant.
And, um, I know that you've been looking at the, um,
submission itself, but I, I just want to focus just quickly
on the intent of the public service.
And that is, um, what's actually written out in the
strategic intentions 20, 24, 28 of, um,
and that's around serving and its people, um,
through trusted public service.
I think there was a word of, um, fairness, um, equality
and transparency that was, um, said in the last, uh,
submission better outcomes
and improve public services for individuals, communities,
organized services around the needs.
And I think that's a word I'd like to underline here,
the needs of New Zealanders, um,
rather than agency functions, um, a lot of the intent of
what I can see here is, is around functionality.
Um, but it's actually focusing on the needs
of New Zealanders, maintain
and enhanced public trust
by acting constitutionally ethically,
and in a way that represents democratic entity
to your Wai Tangi principles.
So that to me is the, is the background of measure of
how we'd be measuring the changes to, um, uh,
in the public service amendment pool.
Um, when I was a public servant, I, um, committed to
and took very seriously, very much like when I was a scout
or a, or a cub, we would take those, uh, um, oaths
that we used to take is, um, very seriously.
And, uh, I think that the spirit of service
that the public service has committed to, um,
also is a foundation in a way of measuring
how these changes work.
And I've just explained that around democracy, human rights,
integrity, transparent and accountability.
So public servants hold themselves accountable.
Um, does, uh, do the amendments here allow, um,
the public service to work in a way that it's accountable
to the needs of the people of New Zealand.
And in particular is, um, we're speaking here, um,
to Maori.
Um, so the, um,
opposes the key provisions in the Public Service Amendment
Bill that threaten the integrity of the public service
and diminish commitment to Maori, um, te
and obviously the long term public Good.
Um, I think you'd, you'd agree with me that TE's been
around a lot longer, um, than, uh, the spool.
Um, and it's something that has been focused on
and committed to, um, by the Crown.
Um, and I want to ensure, um,
and the Ang, uh, would like it to be, uh, understood and,
and focused on, um, that there is a lens
that determines whether that is actually still, um,
the fact, um, by these, uh, amendments.
So our concerns and recommendations, um, recommendations.
You've, uh, just heard about the diversity, pay, equity
and inclusion, the removal of that.
Um, and you understand,
I think very clearly from our last submitter, how
that impacts, um, the people, uh, of New Zealand
and the people working in the public service.
Um, it definitely impacts Maori.
Maori are, um, the one demographic that is hugely impacted,
and it most definitely impacts women
and other, um, minority groups, uh,
that are there, sorry, I would say other minority groups,
um, including, um, our Pacifica, um, whanau.
So our recommendation in, in that respect is to remain,
to retain that and restrengthen legislative requirements
for diversity, inclusion and pay equity, um,
and making sure that there's an explicit ref,
explicit reference to TEI obligations
to address those disparities affecting Maori.
So we oppose the removal of pay equity
and diversity inclusion requirements.
I'll quickly just go through the next couple, um,
that the changes to the purpose
of the public service for Maori.
The long-term public interests includes intergenerational
wellbeing, protection of Tonga,
and during partnerships promised under and public,
and including, hopefully yourselves cannot, um,
but recognize the, um, impact of changes that have happened
and happened under this government,
under successful governments that have been positive,
but also the negative ones.
Um, and I believe that the removal
of these principles under crowns undermines the crown's
obligations to, through the public services ability
to uphold Maori aspirations and responsibilities.
Something that I focused on very, um, intently when I worked
for the Ministry of Primary Industries.
Um, we opposed,
therefore, the removal of change in the purpose section
to remove the long purpose, the long-term public interests,
supporting both current and future governments
and facilitating active citizenship.
Um, one other area we would like to focus on,
and it's around the delegation of powers
to private contractors, um, allowing the, uh,
chief executives to de delegate core public services
and functions of private contractors at risks eroding public
accountability and weakening the crown's ability
to meet its te obligations.
Um, Maori communities have historically been excluded from
decision making and outsource services,
and I would say that, um, Maori have also been, um, uh,
part of those outsourcing.
So there is a way that that can actually, um,
be, um, or how would you say it, um, determined in a way
that it would actually help,
but actually delegating responsibility to private entities,
um, decreases the accountability of departments, agencies,
um, to actually deliver, um, to Maori.
They don't have the amount of control over it, um,
when it's actually in-house.
So we also impose, uh,
public service chief executors having the ability
to delegate their functions or powers to the private sector.
I think that overall, um, again, it's your, your, uh,
your purpose here is to actually listen to everyone's, um,
submissions and to give fair
and reasonable, um, recommendations.
Um, back to, um, parliament, so,
and all, I think from, uh, the ANGs perspective
focusing on Maori, if you can truly say
that in these changes have fairness, transparency,
and equality, and meet, uh, the public services spirit
of service, the promise, um, by listening to this submission
and others like it, I think you'll be, um, going a long way
to ensuring that we keep a good, fair
and equitable public service. Thank you.
Thanks. And there's one minute to run.
We'll try and get two quick questions in
very quickly from me.
Just, are you suggesting
that if appointments get changed from both being both merit
and the I as considerations to only merit that,
that will disadvantage, um, Maori
and they won't have the same opportunities if
it's only based on merit?
It's not an if it's actually around
before you get to the merit,
but it's actually making sure that those things, that the,
that the public services committed to both, um,
and the disparities that are there for Murray,
if they aren't there in the first place, then
everything else, um, becomes a, an either or.
So it's actually, the focus is actually on making sure
that Maori are, are respected as a treaty partner.
And quickly, dam look, look very,
Uh, killer. Following
on from that, there is a submission, not your one
that says that DEI initiatives intended
to combat discrimination can inadvertently foster
reverse discrimination.
Can you respond to that in terms
of your experience within the public service, whether
that's a reality or not?
Yeah, I, I, I don't think so.
I think that it's, it's the intent.
So if you've got an intent to, to discriminate,
um, you will do it.
If you have a, a, a no intent to discriminate,
but it actually has an discriminated outcome, um,
you would be able to see that
or at least be acknowledged that, or be seen to.
So, um, you'd have to go through them one by one.
But if they do have that outcome, then you would be able
to see it and respond to it.
But it still stands that the tenant is
that there are marginalized communities, um, and,
and demographics that are not serviced
by these changes, uh, and
therefore will be even more marginalized and,
and, um, more, um, at risk.
Thank you. We are, uh, out of time there,
but we'll, um, appreciate you coming in today.
Uh, we're gonna move on to Jeff
and Steph from the Free Speech Union.
Yoda. Thank you. Got,
Thank you. And I think
I saw Jeff pop up before, and then just
Yeah, there's two of us here.
Okay, fantastic. In the meantime, um,
while he just joins us back in online,
uh, there's 10 minutes.
Welcome, Jeff, for your submission.
Uh, I'll let you know when there's a minute
to run floor's. Yours.
Thank you. Um, hopefully it'll be about half,
half talking in questions.
So, um, thank you for the opportunity
to speak with you today.
Um, as we stated in our written submission,
we support the bills subject to some qualifications.
We welcome its intent
to strengthen the public service principles,
especially political neutrality, which we recognize as
to a well-functioning and integrous public service.
The Public Service Commission has described political
neutrality as a hallmark
of New Zealand system of government.
It enables the public service to serve any government
of the day, as well as New Zealanders
fairly and professionally.
When neutrality is strong, citizens can trust the state.
But when neutrality erodes, trust follows, unfortunately,
we believe that we are witnessing this erosion in real time.
The commission's own long-term insights briefing paper
entitled The Future of Public Service Integrity,
recently identified politicization
as a concern in the public service.
Politicization is necessarily a warning signal
of weakening political neutrality.
Local analysis cited in the briefing identified politically
responsive behavior by public servants as a more subtle form
of politicization in the public service.
These findings are consistent with concerns
that the Free Speech Union has been attempting
to raise throughout this year, following concerns
that we've heard from members, supporters,
and public servants across a number of agencies.
In practice, we see political neutrality
as being tested in two ways.
First, by superiors managers, leaders, or senior officials,
or in professional development sessions
who make overtly p political statements, setting a tone
that implies that certain views are acceptable
and that others are not.
Second, by a growing sense,
that staying silent is the safest course of action.
Many public servants,
often those whose views reflect White New Zealand society
tell us that they self-censor, they keep their heads down,
they don't speak freely for fear of formal
or informal retribution from bosses and colleagues.
The result is what social scientists call a false consensus.
When everyone assumes that everyone agrees
because dissenting voices have gone quiet.
And Wellington, especially this false consensus can make the
public service appear more uniform than it really is,
and frankly, less connected to the public that it serves.
It also limits the ability to talk through policy ideas,
risks, or issues with work to raise new ideas
or discuss the limitations of existing dogma.
This quickly has the ability to affect the quality
of work being delivered for the public,
which will then further impact on public trust.
We've also heard reports from about multiple public service
leaders in public forums
and statements, um,
interpreting public service neutrality in a way
that risks the will of the government
of the day being undermined under the guise of continuity
and consistency of service with time
and without intervention.
This process reinforces a deepening spiral of silence
for individual public servants,
creates a real moral tension.
Public servants who value neutrality
and integrity now face three difficult choices,
either conform and express support explicitly
or through silence for the perceived prevailing views,
even when it compromises their personal integrity
and causes moral injury, or to speak out
and risk professional and social consequences,
or to opt out entirely and leave the public service.
We've spoken with public servants who are deeply committed
to serving the New Zealand public,
but feel increasingly trapped between their conscience
and a career that they value highly.
This is surely not the kind of environment that we want
for our public servants.
It's worth noting that this will not be felt so acutely
or possibly even at all by public servants
who share the perceived majority view.
This is the kind of experience
that only becomes visible when individuals find themselves
with an alternative perspective than the perceived majority.
True neutrality requires an environment
of team psychological safety that is a shared belief
that the team is safe for interpersonal risk taking.
Public servants need to believe that it's safe
to speak honestly, to take risks, and to raise uncomfortable
or contentious ideas while the Public Service commission's
speaking out process exists.
In theory, its effectiveness depends on trust, trust
that concerns that will be taken seriously addressed
adequately, and not result in adverse repercussions.
The most recent public service census shows
that this trust is lacking,
and that finding is entirely consistent with
what we hear from those inside the system.
The situation will not improve itself,
and in fact, without intervention is
likely to only get worse.
We therefore welcome this bill as an opportunity
to renew commitment to the public service principles.
As we noted in our submission, we encourage the committee
to strengthen provisions for protecting free speech,
including through speaking out processes
and reinforcement of the rights enshrined
by the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act
to further support the intent of the bill being realized.
To this end, we again recommend more accountability on
senior managers to ensure team psychological safety,
including a robust culture of interpersonal risk taking
and an acceptance of intellectual diversity
throughout the public service.
Ultimately, the public service principles,
political neutrality, and an open environment for viewpoint
and political dynamism need
to be reinvigorated if the public services
to remain credible and representative of all New Zealanders.
Thank you. We've got a few questions lined up.
We're starting with Andy Foster.
Thank, thank you very much for your submission.
Look, um, understand exactly what you're saying.
How do we, um, thread that line between people
who are effectively wanting to speak out?
We've seen that public servants speaking out in a very
political way, often criticizing, oh,
I think we've seen examples of criticizing a minister,
for example, very directly with what's clearly some sort
of personal view and speaking out in a free
and frank way, which is about good advice if you like.
How, how, how do we draw the line between those two things?
C can I just clarify on the, on the first kind
of situation that you were talking about with kind
of speaking up like
politically about ministers and things like that?
Do you mean in a public setting or do you mean Oh,
That, in that, in that
particular instance that I'm thinking of?
Yes, it was very public setting.
Right, okay. Yeah.
So there's an internal and there's an
external dimension to it.
Mm-hmm. Yes. I guess, I guess it's probably true,
but I'm trying to thread that line between providing good
advice to help the governance and, and the,
and administration of the, of the country
and people, uh,
who are within the public service expressing possibly a
personal view, um, which may be critical
of the government in both cases may
be critical of the government, but, um,
Yeah, yeah, There is a distinction.
I think I just wondered how you thread that line,
I guess.
Yeah, just, sorry, do you wanna jump
in and I'll say if, yeah,
I think drawing a clear distinction
between external speaking, which is seriously problematic
and internal speaking where people can,
can share diverse views, respect them,
and hopefully reach an agreement
or consensus through open listening is really important.
Um, there are inherent intentions in free speech,
but we feel that, you know, drawing a clear distinction
between internal and external is important
and external is very problematic, uh, and difficult
and internal, we need more of it and is positive.
Okay. That's very helpful, thank you. Yeah.
So my question, no, I'll just jump in.
My question was really the same line,
which is you're just really talking about having a healthy
culture where you can have robust discussions
behind closed doors,
but you're not suggesting that people to, for the sake
of their conscience can speak out publicly.
The focus that we, we've really had in this is thinking
about people within their workplace settings, being able
to express the views that they Yeah.
That they hold authentically. Yep.
Yeah, that's far more as well. Resilient. Yeah.
Thank you. Um, I think there's a interesting distinction
to be made between views
and evidence, which we could actually tease
out a little bit more there.
Um, some views are more evidence based than others, but, um,
but my actual question was on the, um, the public
insights briefings,
and I've just been looking at the specific,
the second long term insights briefing
for the public service.
And, um, I imagine that you've read that and I want
Yes, yes. We did a submission
on that as well.
Yes. Um, and is your view that having those separate
insights briefings is useful rather than wrapping them all
up into one single briefing,
which is what's recommended as far as I understand.
Sorry, do you think Sorry, Jeff, you go.
I, I I think you're correct.
Uh, I think there is benefits in the long,
long-term insights briefing.
Wrapping them up might work better.
They might be more in fact impactful
and they might be more relevant.
Uh, so we're agnostic on the long-term insights briefing.
I'm not sure what impact the ones have had,
but we certainly favor a public service that thinks ahead
and, and looks at long-term trends, exactly how that's done,
uh, can be debated.
Yeah. And thank you. We are unfortunately out time there.
Um, but thank you for joining us online today.
We're gonna move to Hapi Public and believe it's Derek.
Welcome. Thank you.
Um, you've seen the, the, the way around.
So the Times's all yours,
and I'll let you know when there's minutes run.
Cool. So, so I like the previous speakers.
I'll try to be very quick and open it up.
Plenty of time for questions. Um, just a brief introduction.
So Hape Public formerly Institute of Public Administration,
um, my background, just so you know, um, these days I teach
and research public policy
and public management that in a previous life
as a deputy public service commissioner,
a senior treasury official MSD,
and spend time at OACD, including in
as commission responsibility
of public service code of conduct.
Um, so in our submission, we, I guess I,
my starting point is really if
you look at the evidence on the New Zealand public sector,
we rank in the top group in the world on,
on virtually any measure that you look at.
And underpinning that is a long tradition
of a merit based politically neutral, uh, public service,
which provides free and frank advice
and supports stewardship.
And more, more recently I've got gray hair,
so I remember the Official Secrets Act
and the Official Information Act.
So since 1983, we've had the
Official Information Act and open government.
So there's some things in the bill that, um, um,
by public support and we are particularly pleased to see
that the five principles underpinning
the high performing state
that we have in New Zealand have been retained.
There are, however, some things in the bill,
which we're disappointed to see have
been proposed to be admitted.
And we listed out four, um,
long-term insights briefing, which you just raised, Celia,
um, DEI, which is a controversial issue,
but I'm happy to speak to that.
Uh, CE Reappointments, which I think is a mistake.
You'll really, uh, come to RU
and, um, omitting the, the need
to serve successful governments,
not just the government of the day.
So speaking very briefly to each of those, um, starting
with long-term insights briefing, um,
I can't imagine answering your question.
I can't imagine a state of
what the world in which one Unified
mage document adds value.
Um, um, I've read, okay, say I've read 'em all.
They're a bit of, seem to me from my review, they're a bit
of a mixed bag, but I can think of three
that have been quite influential.
Um, so it seems to me if you did a cost benefit analysis
of them, if you've had some that are beneficial, some
that haven't added much value,
the net's gonna be quite positive.
So the ones that I'd regard as beneficial, um,
and area one one, um, so we've had driverless cars running
around San Francisco since 2020.
MOT did a piece on driverless cars
that informs not only decisions,
will we actually need a second crossing in Auckland if
vehicles can travel at a hundred Ks an
hour, one meter apart.
It's a good question that the Ministry
of Transport needs to understand.
It also informs
how you roll out the switch away from the road user tax.
So this example of where they've done the strategic thinking
so they can form not only capacity planning,
but also some, a major reform the government has underway.
I could use other two other examples.
The Ministry of Health on, um, uh, a kind of
targeted medicines and the treasuries thing on
how you respond to macro shocks.
So the treasury's got a much clearer playbook now on
how you respond to co things supply shocks like COVID
and, um, demand shocks like the GFC.
So I think, um, net long-term insights briefings have been
beneficial, but it speaks to the more important thing,
which is the role of the public service isn't just
to serve the government of the day, it's
to serve future governments.
Her majesty's loyal opposition are her
majesty's loyal opposition.
There are integral part of the constitution,
and you as a senior public servant, you know,
a duty not just to the government of the day,
but to the opposition as your future owner.
So, um, speaking to my the last point, um,
including successive governments
and the purpose statement
for the public services, I think very important.
I'll move quickly to DEI, it's a really contentious issue.
Um, I'm old enough
to have grown up under the old public service.
The public service I joined was male, stale and pale.
It has become much more diverse in my lifetime,
but we still have a long way to go.
So, uh, high pi public thinks that the removal
of the DEI is a step backwards
because DEI done well reinforces the merit principle.
You want to be able to draw appointments from
as bigger bench as possible,
and DEI as the previous submitters to creating cultures
that encourage diverse views,
results in a richer culture.
And it also means we'll have a public service
that is more reflective of New Zealand as a whole,
which was not the case
for the public service that I've joined.
I want to acknowledge, however, DEI done badly is perverse
quotas are bad
and there's evidence to,
I can cite some evidence about how that could work.
So DEI done badly is, is a bad thing.
DEI done well is useful.
So the trick is not to ban it, but to stop this to,
but is to target on the bits where DEI has done badly,
uh, very quickly.
Um, chief executive reappointment, can I just finish
because I've got this, my last one, then I, then I'm done.
No, we're just queuing up. Yeah, yeah, sure.
So, um, well, last time I really, and I took questions
and I never got Yeah, keep going, keep going.
So just on the reappointments,
I think you rule that decision.
Um, so this is the idea that you, um, rather than
at, at five year, at five years,
chief executives could be reappointed
that you open up the process.
What that's basically gonna do is truncate the timeframe
over which GEs operate the last year they're gonna be
dead man shoes territory.
So by basically, if I was running for DCE,
which I decided not DCE, which I decided not to do,
but I'd be starting to think about my reelection campaign
in, in year three, whereas at the moment you've got a
reasonable prospect of being reappointed unless you fail.
So if you, uh, to an, an example from my career,
I worked on the Public Audit Act.
So we appoint orders a general for seven years.
That was a very deliberate decision.
I actually leave that piece of work.
So you do need chief executives to take a longer term view,
particularly because ministers come and go.
Governments come and go.
So I think we'll really
that proposal on Chief Executive Repoint.
So in summary, um,
there's some things in this bill we are supportive of.
There's some opportunities I think
to, to make the bill better.
I open up the questions.
Okay. Uh, LAA. Oh, thank you. Really appreciated.
Um, your written and oral submission.
I'm really interested in terms of your comments around DEI.
Um, when it works, it works well when it's,
um, included.
Can you just talk, unpack a bit further about the,
that rather than the bad stuff in terms of DEI when it's,
uh, the processes are followed?
Um, I've got little to add to the previous submission.
I thought they covered that really well.
I think a work for a workplace that respects
and encourages the diversity of views,
that it's a safe place to think differently,
that's gonna be a much higher performing,
much richer environment
and a much more supportive environment.
Um, but yeah, DEI bun done badly actually discourages
that people self-censor
Supplementary. Yeah.
Melissa, what's your, what,
how would you actually describe DEI done bad.
Could you describe a situation where it is done bad?
So, um, quotas, um, so, um,
the American Football League, the, you know, um,
overwhelmingly f blacks are over seat in football players,
but like Mara Pacifica, New Zealand rugby,
they introduced a quota requirement that coaches, you had
to have a black candidate.
It actually reduced the probability
of a black candidate being selected as a coach. So
Does Union University 'cause
They were token, you know, because they, they were see
'cause 'cause it, it disadvantaged the person
that was put on who was seen
as a token candidate rather than, uh, there on their merits.
So merits really important,
but you need to draw off a big bench as possible.
Having specific quotas for ethnicity, gender,
all of that thing is actually a bad thing.
Any, anything else that, uh, you would actually su you know,
say is a DEI done bad?
Oh, um, it, I think it can be done in a way
that discourage, it's a cultural openness.
Uh, there's a utopia clip I can think of which talks about
that stuff, you know, but I think
DEI done well is much better.
So what's that? DEI done
that without quotas. When you don't have the
Divert. Oh, just when it,
when it discourages diverse views. Dis.
Thank you. We, we are, um, out of time there. I'm sorry.
So we are going to move on to our next submission.
Thank you for taking the time, uh, today.
And our last submission will be from the PSA
and I think we might be in person.
Welcome. Uh, we've got last 10 minutes set aside for you.
I'll let you know when there's a minute to run.
You might like to leave some time for questions.
It's all yours.
Kia Alex UA I kiata. Andrew mcc.
We are here on behalf of New Zealand Public Service
Association, te P, the PSA,
which is the largest trade union in New Zealand
with over 94,000 members.
We represent workers across the core public service as well
as the wider state sector such
as crown entities in the health sector.
This bill will directly affect the work
that our members do every day
to serve the New Zealand public.
We oppose this bill.
We want to summarize our main issues with this bill
across six main areas
and make recommendations for change if the bill goes ahead.
The first of these areas is diversity and inclusion.
This legislation strips out almost all requirements on chief
executives and the public service commissioner
to promote diverse workplaces.
Diversity is necessary for a good,
effective, efficient public service.
We want the people delivering public services
to reflect all New Zealand communities.
We want different experiences, different histories,
and we have pursued diversity
because we know it makes the public service
as a whole stronger, just like the minister.
We are concerned that in the recent public service census,
only 44% of respondents said they're confident
that people get jobs based off merit in their organization.
But it's a huge leap to use that
to justify attacking diversity
and inclusion initiatives
as the minister has done with this bill.
When we talk to our members, they tell us
that when they see a lack of merit,
it's often about managers playing favorites or
because people tend to gravitate towards people like
them in hiring decisions.
Largely the opposite concern about diversity.
Uh, as to diversity
and appointments, we are hearing the opposite.
Promoting diversity and inclusion is part of
how you build capacity across the workforce
and make sure people are employed based on merit without
assumptions or other people's biases getting in the way.
We want to see the act maintain its commitment to merit
and retain requirements on CES
and the commissioner to promote divert, promote diverse
and inclusive workplaces.
The second area is pay equity.
The bill also strips out requirements on chief executives
and the public service commissioners to commissioner
to work towards pay equity and reduce gender discrimination
and decisions on pay.
The PSA has been fighting
for pay equity for over a hundred years.
There's been an equal pay act since 1972,
but it's the program of work within the Public Service
Commission supported
by a clear mandate in the Public Service Act
that's moved the dial in the last few years in terms
of reducing the gender pay gap.
We should be proud of in building on that work,
not dismantling the very tools
that finally deliver progress.
Removing pay equity from the Public Service Act is part
of a sustained attack on equity
and part of a campaign to undervalue women.
This government got rid
of the pay equity task force changed legislation under
urgency to extinguish pay equity claims made settlements
impossible for thousands,
and virtually impossible for any of the few
who can even raise a claim.
And now they're proposing to take away the legislative
support for pay equity in the Public Service
Act put together.
This means women and people
who do what's traditionally been considered,
what considered women's work will continue to be undervalued
and underpaid gains made to reduce the pay gap
and treat female dominated workforces fairly will be lost.
It is women who will pay the price
for satisfying government spending priorities.
We want to see the ACT retain requirements on CEEs
and the commissioner to priorities pay, prioritize,
pay equity, and eliminating gender-based discrimination.
Um, yeah, the next area that we wanted
to talk about is the independence of the public service.
So there are several changes that we are concerned about
that will, that we think will have a cumulative effect
of weakening public service neutrality overall and,
and weakening that independence from political interference.
So that includes the provisions
around the chief executive reappointment process, um,
the direct ministerial involvement in setting performance
expectations and reviews of chief executives.
Um, the central level involvement in recruitment decisions
for key positions across the public service, uh,
the focus on delivering for the government
of the day rather than current and success of governments
and their responsibility for chief executives
to implement minister's lawful instructions.
All of those things we think are like, yeah, adding up
to a cumulative effect of weakening neutrality overall
and political neutrality
and independent cornerstone at the public service.
And we, and we think it would be really concerning, um,
to go down that path and lose the trust
of the people potentially we're also opposed to parts
of the bill that will weak weaken the focus on the public
service pursuing the long term interest of public.
So that's the things like, um, removing the reference to
supporting the government
to pursue the long term public interest,
removing the reference to supporting current
and successful governments, um,
and removing their requirements for agencies
to produce long time, long term insights briefings.
So we think it's these, again,
it's a cumulative thing adds up
to the public service becoming more about short term
thinking, um, which is the opposite of
what we need right now to deliver on some
of the biggest challenges that New Zealand faces.
Also undermines the political neutrality of public service
by taking away the legislative basis for them
to make sure they can retain the confidence
of future governments by being seen
to act neutrally in the public interest.
So we want to see those provisions left in the act.
We also oppose this section removing,
facilitating active citizenship
from the purpose of public service.
And we would like to see that remain in the act
because our members care about this strongly
because active citizenship is essential to well functions.
Um, and finally we want to draw the committee's attention
to Clause 45, which would extend the list of people
that public service chief executives can delegate
their functions and powers to.
Um, the bill would extend that to contractors
and employees of contracted organizations,
and we think that opens up possibilities in terms
of the privatization of powers that should only rest with,
um, accountable public service organizations.
Um, so far in this term of government seen all kinds
of attempts to privatize government delivered services.
And the provisions of this law seem
to be another step in that direction.
We think the actual retain its current wording,
which only allows for delegation
to other public service
organizations and other public servants.
Um, that's, uh, summary of, uh, submission.
Um, but yeah, we, we don't take if you have any
Can I, can I just ask, we've,
we've heard from a few people about, um,
all this amounts so far.
The DEI piece have been saying they want merit based
appointments, but from a broad bench, the, the
annual report figures
for the public service last year showed, um, even in,
if you take just the senior top three tiers
of management women at 56.7%, um, Maori at 17.1% at
or above representative levels in New Zealand,
is your concern that they will
go in a different direction without that if you say
that merit based appointments that they will go
and all choose white men or something like that?
What, what, what's the, i I just don't quite understand the
concern that merit based appointments won't
pick the best person for the job.
I think the concern or these part of the concern is
that making these changes indicates that, that
there's no need or desire to support that progress.
That's what that communicates.
So do you still want, but but,
but are you saying like previous submitters, what I'm trying
to understand that you still want the best person
for the job on merit.
Yes. But we are saying that
that requires proactive work
to set aside often unconscious biases.
And what we hear from membership is that when
that work is not done
and is not prioritized, there is a risk that people hire
and promote and engage with people that look like themselves
and that the work and progress done to support
and develop a diverse workforce that can go backwards.
Yeah. So you're saying that you still want the best person
for the job no matter what.
Yes. But you might have to tell people,
remember the best man for a job
isn't a white always a white man.
Yes. Because we don't trust that 56.7%
of women in those senior roles to remember that.
I don't think that's what we're saying.
I think we're saying what we're doing is working,
so why would we change it?
Okay. Um, I've got Celia next and
Yes, I was interested in your comments about, um, current
and successive government
and whether in your view, this bill sort
of entrenches short-term thinking
rather than long-term solutions.
Mm-hmm. And if you want to make any comments about whether
the number of long-term insight reports should be
reduced to one or several or the current number.
Um, yeah, we think that, I mean, obviously, uh,
the long-term insights roofing process hasn't been in place
for a very long time,
and there's always room for tweaks
to, you know, improve on it.
But we think that overall, having agencies responsible
for doing that, for working out a topic that they,
that they think is important
and they need to consult with the public about, they need
to do analysis on, um, is really important.
And so to get rid of all of those requirements in favor
of a single long term insights thing, basically it would,
um, yeah, it misses an opportunity for
a tangible way that,
that all public service agencies can be doing their
long-term thinking like in a, in a kind of structured
and formalized way.
Um, I think that overall, yeah,
there are several provisions in this bill that, um,
that kind of narrow the focus down to, yeah,
that short term serving the government of the day
talking about delivering and getting stuff done
and not really focusing at all on the future
and that kind of long term being prepared for,
um, for the future.
And so I think there's, so obviously there's things
that remain in the bill about, um, you know, uh,
providing long-term advice,
but that seems to be more about providing advice on the
long-term impacts of what the government of the day wants,
not providing proactive advice about
what the government should be considering in the long
term and what's on the horizon.
Thank you. We are actually out of time at that point, uh,
slightly over, but thanks for your time submitting today.
Um, and with that we're gonna end the public part
of our submissions and we'll just go,
just give, um, one, one more minute
for Celia to make it back.
Yeah. It's not in the,
um, we can start Happy days.
Welcome. And we are gonna move into public hearings
for the local government Systems improvement amendment Bill,
um, starting with Canterbury Regional Council.
We'll have 10 minutes for this.
I'll let you know when there's a minutes to run,
but you might like to leave some time
for questions for yours.
Uh, good day. Uh, Gilda, Tim, uh, chair, uh,
and, uh, nice to see a few familiar faces,
uh, uh, there as well.
Uh, thanks for the opportunity just to, uh, to speak to you,
um, a really important, uh, piece of work for obviously
for local government, um,
and as partners to you as central government.
Uh, so I've got a couple of notes here.
I'll take the, uh, the submission is read.
Um, but as, as I just said, I mean,
this is a really important bill in the, in the context
of significant legislative
and policy reform that is impacting on both our local
and regional government.
Uh, whilst we do welcome the initiatives
to improve the effectiveness
and the efficiency of local government
and to provide regulatory relief.
We are concerned that the current ambiguity of the bill,
coupled with financial management approach
and pro, uh, the proposed future policy settings such
as rates capping RMA reform could lead
to some unintended consequences,
which will ultimately contradict the bill's intent
and significantly impact on our community's
economy and our environment.
Uh, these unintended consequences could include, um,
ineffective decision making, increased legal challenges
and costs, uh, which none of us really want, uh,
the inability to effectively deliver on our current
and future community needs and expectations, uh,
and provide, you know, as you know,
as a regional government, we
and local government, I suppose, we provide a broad range
of core services that safeguard communities, uh,
the economy and the environment.
If rates capping, uh, is to be tied to these core services,
uh, those not specifically mentioned such as biosecurity,
navigational safety, are they less of a priority?
Uh, so that was one big question that we have with the, uh,
intent of this, uh, piece of, uh, legislation.
There are numerous functions provided by local
and regional government that are critical to communities,
local, regional, and national economies,
and the environment that aren't identified as core services
or signaled in the Gov government's reform program, these,
um, amendments, along with the proposed policy settings
to limit council expenditure,
will not just fix the fundamental issues,
including the unsustainable nature of current structure
and funding of local government service delivery.
So your failure
to address these fundamental issues will mean that services
and the investment required for our communities
to address the current and future challenges locally,
regionally, and,
and nationally, um, possibly will not be able
to be managed or sustained.
So, recognizing that the change that's afoot
with regional government
through the Resource Management Act, uh, we're all aware
of it and we're, uh, working towards it.
Uh, these challenges faced
by local government council has been,
our council has been very proactive to try
and explore some of these, uh, implications
and some of these, uh, external changes
for the future options.
Uh, so we've been really trying to work hard to understand
what, uh, you know, you guys as the government are trying
to do, uh, and working with our communities
and stakeholders in industry to understand
how we can best add value.
So, um, these include council exploring, uh, potential fit
for future structures of local
and regional government, uh, in the region,
inviting perspectives from our partners
UA industry and central government.
Uh, and we've spoken to a number of people,
I think some people on this panel as well about that.
Uh, the current legislation only presents really two options
for reorganization
and legislative options should be available so
that they future proof their structures
and so they can be pursued.
If you start working on making this bill right now,
you might, um, find
that you're putting the cart before the horse.
Uh, given the current reform program
and the unsustainable nature of the current structure
for local government, uh, especially around funding
and service delivery, we do urge the government
to consider the cumulative impacts of legislation reform
and work with us to take a more comprehensive review, uh,
review and look at the future systems.
Um, we will take the remaining points that we've given you
as read, uh, and if there's any questions,
I'm more than we, more than happy to take them. Yeah.
Uh, Tanya. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank you, Dion.
Look, um, in response to your submission, uh,
and thank you for it around those critical essential
services that are provided, um, your submission identifies
that there are a range that are critical.
I mean, civil defense is, is one example, um, that,
that clearly this is not covered by the,
the government's legislation.
So are you seeking to simply have a catchall?
I know you refer to clause F being inserted,
uh, to cover all of that.
Um, and if so, are you comfortable that that gives effect
to the prioritization that would be required for each
of those aspects of other critical parts of,
um, of council life?
So, I mean, there's, there's two elements to this.
One is, yes, I, I believe a catchall
because you aren't covering some
of these really important, uh, aspects.
And some communities have more priority for other, uh,
for aspects than, than other aspects.
For example, areas near the coast have far more, uh,
important work.
Well, you know, they're, they're far more focused on,
on coastal management and,
and civil defense in those spaces,
rather than some communities
that don't have those challenges.
Uh, so a catchall would help.
But the, the, the one issue that we wanted to identify is
that depending on the government of the day
and the legislation of the day, the priorities change.
And so if you, you fix these priorities within a piece
of legislation, then you're going to have
to change another piece of legislation again, uh, to be able
to, uh, to give effect to those.
So there might be unintended consequences down the line,
depending on what the government of the day wants,
prioritization or the priority for local government to be.
Thank you, Celia Wade.
Brad, thank you, chair.
Um, good morning, and thank you both.
Um, my question is really about the role
of regional councils in the long-term, uh,
biodiversity recovery of regions.
I've recently been to the banks Peninsula Conservation
Trust, and they're very appreciative of the work
that the Canterbury Regional Council does.
Um, do you think that those areas of predator control,
weed control, supporting communities to do a lot
of the mahi, do you think they're pretty much
undercooked in this bill?
A hundred percent. And I think, um,
that's why we mentioned that those, those areas of the bill,
they haven't been specifically mentioned, which is why,
what a who has made these priorities.
Different communities have different priorities.
Yes, core services are absolutely critical.
And as a regional council, we have a number
of very critical core functions that we, we have.
But the great thing about local government is that we engage
with communities and want to activate communities.
And as a, as a government, you want
to see activated communities.
And if you just look at the local government elections at
the moment, I don't believe we have activated communities.
And if we further ostracize communities by not being able
to engage them, they're not going
to be involved in doing some of the good work that we want
to see in those outcomes.
So I'd far rather us be talking about outcomes, uh,
and making sure that the outcomes that we have in pieces
of legislation are what reflect
what our communities are asking for.
And your, your example of Bank's Peninsula
is a really good example.
We've got a activated community in that space.
And if we say in a piece of legislation that,
that is not important,
I think it goes fundamentally against, uh,
what we're trying to achieve.
Thank You. You've, you've, um,
you've also got an activated community I saw at a public
meeting in Ash Burton last week.
Yes. Uh, around the methane crisis.
I mean, is that an example of a
council focusing on core services?
Uh, what, what crisis were you talking about
In nitrate?
So, sorry, uh, ni nitrate, you've got farmers.
I saw one example of someone whose water coming onto the
farm was that, you know,
the water running off was at a much lower level,
and yet they're still being,
can't get their re-consent through.
So you've got active community activated communities
on both sides, haven't you?
A hundred percent. And I'm not, I'm not, um, I've been out
to those, those farmers myself,
and I've, I've not specifically, uh, seen,
seen the one maybe you are talking about,
but I'm really concerned about the legislative mud
that we get in, that we are in as well.
Uh, and the consenting issue is one of those regulatory mud
that we've got in place.
And I know that your government has done, uh,
made some steps to try
and, uh, help us with that, which is really appreciative.
Um, but I too wanna work with those communities to make sure
that they have, uh, good processes in place.
So, core service, one
of our main core services at our council is, um,
is, is the regulation.
We've now, uh, worked on getting that, uh,
consent backlog out of the way,
and now we're working with those communities to make sure
that we can work on making sure that the future consents,
um, are streamlined.
And so that can work so that, you know, the outcomes
that those communities want are achieved.
And we've got just under a minute, Andy Foster.
Yeah. Look, um, two parts of the question.
Uh, first one of 'em is in terms
of the core services reserves are in the,
uh, in the, in the mix.
Um, but, you know, the outside reserves doesn't appear to be
so would, um, as your suggestion that we might, uh,
make reserves a little bit more,
more natural environment focused, as well as, uh, you know,
the recreation reserve type proposition.
And the second part is in terms of the, uh, the,
the cost of delivering services.
It probably e can more than any other regional council in
the country, is the one I hear complaints about how, um,
assiduous, uh, the council is in terms of its, um,
regulatory role, uh, how short the consenting, uh,
the consents which are granted are, and
therefore how frequently they have to be done.
Could you help yourself a little bit as well as help your,
particularly your rural community in that respect?
Uh, yeah, no, a hundred percent.
I, I, I totally get where you're coming from with that
so quickly on the reserves, yes.
I, I think, um, you know, if,
if we can broaden those reserves, I think that that is, um,
that is a good thing in terms of the regulatory process,
going back to the question that was asked
before, yes, we can help ourselves.
I know that there is work going on right now.
We're working with, um, those, those farming communities
to find better pathways.
The RMA is a real model.
Um, and I do look forward to when the RMA reform does come
through, and we cannot all work together to say, Hey, look,
this is how it's gonna work in the future.
Uh, and work for those communities who are just trying
to sort of, you know, make the productive economy work, uh,
but also enhancing the, uh, the environment that's
around those areas so that you know, that, you know,
that we're all prospering both environment and our economy.
Good. Thank you. Thank, thank you. We are just out
of time there, so, um, appreciate your time, uh,
down there from Canterbury.
And we're gonna move now to LG N Zs.
Thank You. Joining us in the room,
uh, time's all yours.
I'll let you know when there's a minute to run,
and you might like to leave time for questions. Good.
Thank you very much for your time. Um, I'm Scott Lin.
I'm the interim, uh, CE at LGNZ,
and I'm joined by, um, Simon Rand,
who is our director of policy.
He will help, uh, answer any questions that you might have.
Um, there's kind of three things that I just want
to raise with you today.
So I've kind of talk in a moment to the, um,
proposed purpose of local government core services
and the uniform standing orders.
I do just want to touch on though, uh,
a couple of broader themes.
And, uh, Dion picked up that from,
from the Kennedy Regional Council.
Um, so first of all,
the local government act is important
constitutional legislation.
Um, and we believe changes to
that should not be made lightly.
We are, uh, guess concerned that, um, you know,
changes in government require different legislation,
and that any amendments then are repealed and replaced.
Uh, and ultimately that is a burden for councils
and communities, and ultimately,
it actually incurs cost for rate payers.
So that's our biggest concern.
We would like to ensure that any changes that are made now
or into the future, uh, have bypass and support
and wider engagement.
Uh, and that then just protects, I guess, communities
and the purpose of local government, uh,
and obviously ensures that it is, um, you know,
cost effective, uh, to rate payers.
Um, we know nobody wants to see, uh, you know, increased,
um, rates or, or higher rates, uh, rises.
Uh, let's be honest.
Nobody wants to pay more for, for anything.
Councils work really hard to ensure that their rates are,
um, are reasonable, uh,
but at the same time that they're able
to invest in infrastructure
and deliver services to communities.
And that comes at cost.
Um, councils don't buy bread and milk and butter.
Uh, so measuring rates compared to GDP is not relevant.
They build bridges, they build roads,
and those things are particularly expensive.
Um, and so we just wanna make sure that the, um, you know,
the, the, the, the systems, uh,
improvement bill actually supports our
councils going forward.
Um, the, we also just want to note
that the regulatory impact statement
for the bill makes it clear
that a purpose focused on the wellbeings
of the community has not added cost, uh,
to the sector and to rate payers.
And I think that's a really important, um, thing to note.
Uh, the three things that I'm gonna get into just, uh,
quickly now is first of all, the, um, proposed purpose
of local government.
Um, so we want this legislation to ensure
that councils can continue to provide the activities
and services that communities need and want.
Uh, local government is exactly that.
It's local, and it's for communities to decide, uh,
what levels of service they want
and what they want to invest their rates in.
Uh, at the same time, we want councils to have clarity
and certainty, uh, for, from their governing legislation.
Uh, the draft change in the purpose
of local government in our view, does not achieve this.
Um, there is ambiguity in the terms
and phrases used in the member purpose statement, um,
which may lead to potential legal challenge
and incurs risks in relation to determining whether
or not activities
and service are in fact, um,
within the amended purpose of local government.
This will also, as I've already mentioned
before, increase compliance costs, uh, for councils.
Uh, and that was a point I think was made by Dion as well.
Uh, we do, uh, provide in our submission,
which I'll obviously taken as read some more detail around
that, and we'll also provide some wording, uh,
and potential, uh, changes to the wording there as well.
Um, just moving on to core services.
So there's three aspects that I just wanna touch on, um,
around the reintroduction of core services.
So first of all, um, the core services are presented
as a complete list
and are described as services, um,
when an actual fat councils also deliver
functions and activities.
Um, I think the second point we want to note is that core,
the, the list of core services is incomplete.
Again, I think Dion mentioned this, it's missing a number
of regulatory functions
and key activities that regional councils in particular
play, for example, biosecurity.
Um, and then finally, the use
of the term civil defense emergency services as opposed
to a term that incorporates, uh, reference
to natural hazards, uh, is also missing.
Uh, again, we've also provided some word changing in our
submission, uh, on pages 13 to 14.
Um, lastly I just wanna touch on the
uniform standing orders.
So, um, LGT does not support the proposed introduction
of a new requirement that all local authorities must use the
same set of standing orders.
Um, it's useful, uh, for the sector to have a template
of standing orders, uh,
and in fact, we actually provide that, uh, in partnership
with, um,
but there should be no requirement for all account
for all councils to adopt exactly the same rules
to govern, uh, their business.
It's local democracy. And they should have some
flexibility in that.
Um, standing orders can and should reflect local conditions
and local approaches to the achievement
of local democratic decision making by
and on behalf of communities.
Um, this approach is justified to recognize
that local government is not a one size fits all model.
Um, which councils are very size end compositions across the
country reflect.
Um, so that's, um, our, uh, verbal submission.
Thank you very much for your time.
Happy to take any questions.
Um, yes. First one was City outward Brown.
There's so many questions I could ask. Yeah.
But I'm just going to focus on the economic growth
and development one.
Um, at the moment, a number of councils, um,
fund either unitary
or, um, city fund
regional tourism organizations.
My understanding is that within the current recommender, uh,
the current bill, that that is not a way
that they would be allowed to support local economic growth,
because it's not through infrastructure.
Is that your interpretation of the current recommendations?
Um, yes. It's a good illustration though, where councils,
um, by adopting a more prescriptive purpose
with this ambiguity will have to go line by line
by every decision and, and,
and wrestle over these conversations
because it opens them to legal challenge.
However, as articulated in our submission, um,
we do have a concern
that the current proposed purpose only talks about economic
development by providing local infrastructure,
local public services, and a range of activities.
And that is about the benefit
and cost effectiveness to local communities and businesses.
So investing in, in tourist infrastructure,
investing in events that attract, um, uh, um, uh,
economic development, investing in economic development
and agencies that is up in the air.
And that's why we are providing, um, suggested wording
that would, would say amongst other things, um,
uh, in that to enable kind of councils
to invest in economic growth and prosperity.
Um, Andy Foster. Yeah, look, thanks.
Um, one of the things you talked about is, um, it's
for communities to decide what, um, services
that, that, that they want.
Um, I don't have to look very far from here, uh,
to see communities who may not be entirely happy
with the decisions that their councils make.
Um, can you just tell us how we might actually get better
ways of making sure that councils are actually responding
to the community's desires, uh,
and that the, that the consultation process
that they run are authentic
and they're actually doing the listening
and potentially responding?
Um, so look, I, I'll have a couple of comments
that I might see someone wants to add to that.
So I think the first thing, I guess,
is looking at local government election
and local governments turn out.
So traditionally we do see a 42%, we're hoping
for a greater turnout outcome Saturday.
Uh, and, and we've done some work in terms
of electorial reform, which we think would help, um,
support greater turnout.
So I think we do need to obviously recognize
that turnout at 42% is not satisfactory, and
therefore, uh, councils aren't necessarily reflective
of the wider community, simply
because I think for many instances, uh, rate payers
and citizens don't understand the value
they get from their councils.
So I think there's a piece of work around, first of all, uh,
helping people understand the value
that they get from their councils a second.
The second point is to actually make, um, a number
of changes to the way in which we, um, uh,
I guess point our council.
So the electoral reform work that we did,
it was 2020 odd recommendations,
and it ranged from supporting a four year term, uh,
to looking at a national body overseeing our local
government elections, moving away from postal
voting, uh, et cetera.
So I think fundamental, uh, one minute. Thank you.
I think the fundamental purpose would be to actually,
you know, increase voter turnout and
therefore increase engagement.
It's the bit between elections I'm interested in,
and, um, just, just on that point,
we cover in our submission
and also the work that we did with electoral reform,
which is we've got a very prescribed engagement requirement
system, particularly around long-term planning
that doesn't meet communities where they are.
It doesn't get a high level of engagement.
We wanna see reform of the requirements around
how councils consult
and engage to get that buy-in that you're talking about.
Um, probably such ending that was
around the course service.
But it's really important that the community,
particularly diverse communities,
and when you've got a very variance
around population about the younger voters
and the, just don't understand the value and the importa.
So can you just unpack,
'cause I'm just looking at your key issues.
Sure. Just very quickly,
Um, a absolutely the mandate, uh, for councils
to governors sits with communities.
And so we think that that,
and engaging in long planning other things in terms
of the services they deliver, the way that they deliver
that should sit with the community.
This could potentially, um, make that more challenging
or more expensive for them to do.
And that is why we're raising that concern.
Thank you. Thank you. And thank you for your time.
Unfortunately, we have, uh, run out,
but, um, so we are going to move on
to the New Zealand initiative.
I believe on the line we have, uh, Nick Clark. Welcome Nick.
We have 10 minutes for this one.
Um, I'll let you know when there's a minute
to run the times or yours.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thanks for the committee for the opportunity
to present on the local government, um,
systems improvements amendment.
Bill. I'm Nick Clark.
I'm a senior fellow at the New Zealand Initiative.
I've worked on local government policy
for nearly 25 years in total for, um,
various business organizations such as Business New Zealand,
federated Farmers, and now the New Zealand initiative.
So I've seen the various swings and roundabouts
and local government policy, including the various changes
to the acts purpose statement.
The initiative supports the bill's direction,
which is refocusing councils on core services
and strengthening fiscal discipline.
Our support for this refocusing does not represent a retreat
from our commitment to localism and subsid.
Rather, it reflects our view
that councils must first deliver the basics effectively.
This is a necessary course correction.
Some councils have pursued big, ambitious, controversial,
transformative projects.
Others have spent on nice to haves that might be smaller,
but together at cost, at a time of cost of living pressures.
Um, all the while, unfortunately,
too many councils have neglected less visible
or sexy things, um, like fundamental infrastructure, water,
pipes, roads, et cetera.
New Zealand spends a lot on infrastructure,
but according to the infrastructure commission's research,
both central and local government do a bad job at
getting value from that.
Spending more recently, perhaps as a consequence of having
to catch up, um, on, um, infrastructure, but also inflation
and the, and the more non-core stuff that's been going on.
We've seen runaway rates increases averaging 12% in the
20 24, 25 year, the steepest in at least two decades,
probably three, and deteriorating basic services.
The prime minister's call last year for councils
to focus on the basics brilliantly resonated
with frustrated rate payers.
And this bill is for government's intent
to deliver on that directive.
We support removing the broad wellbeing mandate
that allowed councils to, to justify almost any activity.
It also made it hard for councils perhaps
to prioritize what is important.
The refocus purpose on core infrastructure
and services is welcome.
It provides a clearer direction,
however, the bill can be improved.
Firstly, um, the statutory list,
of course services captures most council spending,
making prioritization difficult.
And as local government, New Zealand said that just
before, it actually misses out on some other pretty key
aspects of what local government does as well.
So rather than having a sort of a, a one size fits all
very rigid list of core services,
we would like to see this, this clause reframed.
So it provides for a principle framework that scores,
that enables councils to score activities against
criteria such as, you know, market failure, which refers
to public versus private goods, externalities, et cetera,
the feasibility or otherwise of user pays
and subsid principles.
IE what tier of government is best placed to act.
And in our view, this would provide flexible,
economically grounded guidance rather than
that one bridged one size fits all list.
But if Parliament decides that wishes
to retain the statutory list,
it should include some safeguards, uh, should, uh,
suggest cost benefit analysis requirements, um, again,
user pays where feasible.
And the idea that, um,
that we've recently put out rate payer referendum
for major discretionary projects.
We strongly support the bills enhanced performance
measurement and transparency provisions.
We think they could give, um, rate payers, communities
and also councils as well,
some helpful information that'll enable them to, to work out
what good looks like.
Um, publishing comparative performance data similarly should
help councils and informed voters.
We recommend requiring performance results be publicly
reported, including to parliament to ensure
that there is continuous improvement.
We believe the information access provisions
for elected members are crucial.
Our research from late last year shows information
withholding by council bureaucracy can undermine local
democracy and make decision making, uh, less optimal.
Standardized code of conduct should be protect council's
freedom of expression while maintaining
professional standards.
And we also recommend extending Auckland's mayoral office
provisions to all councils on an opt-in basis.
This will provide independent advice for mayors
and strengthen democratic oversight.
While this bill addresses immediate,
some immediate problems,
longer su term sustainability requires better incentives,
and this needs to be the next phase of government reform.
So we recommend exploring
or actually not go good more than exploring actually
implementing revenue, sharing for growth.
Facilitating councils like the GST revenue share on new
residential building, which has been floating around
for a while, but doesn't seem to be, uh,
making much progress, unfortunately, rate payer referendum
for major discretionary projects
and a thing that we call earned autonomy
for high performing councils.
That is where they can get regulatory relief
and perhaps different, um, carve outs that suit them.
For those councils that are doing well,
these would align councils incentives
with community interests while preserving local democracy.
The bill should restore discipline to local government
by sharpening focus on essentials combined
with stronger transparency and governance provisions.
And the changes we propose in our submission.
We think it can help address some of the root causes
of public frustration with councils.
So we support the Bill's passage,
but with our recommended improvements.
Um, thank you. And I'm happy to answer questions,
Uh, senior away, Brett?
Yes. I'd like to follow up on your comments, um, that,
you know, runaway rate rises where we see that,
um, sure.
Rates have gone up recently.
Um, I think the local government, um, New Zealand says
round about $985 a year has increased, um,
since 2023.
But for central government there's 3,200
per household tax increases.
So do you think it's sometimes convenient
for central government to blame rather than help
local government given the
discrepancy between, around about $4,000
paid in rates of $40,000 paid in taxes,
but local government has a quarter of the infrastructure.
So do you think there's, uh, some, um, unfairness
in the attitudes expressed in this bill?
I, I think we make a, a very valid point.
Um, um, Celia, um, I think it's fair to say
that, um, that both sides, both central
and local government, are not necessarily, um,
being optimal in terms of fiscal responsibility.
Um, I think that's a fair comment.
And I think also for a long time there's been issues
with relationships between central and local government
and often, often, um, um, con a lot
of conflict, a lot of blame blaming that goes on,
on both sides, I think.
But central government in particular,
and I think one thing that we've noticed over the years
that I've noticed over the years,
25 years working in this area is
that when parties are in government, they tend to
use local government as a bit of a whipping boy.
And when they're in opposition, they're big fans
of local government and localism.
And we've seen that that switch on numerous occasions.
We, we believe there needs
to be a more constructive relationship at the same time
when you've seen the percentage increases
that we've seen in, in spending
and rates, um, over the last few years, um,
that definitely needs attention.
Um, and although we don't, I don't have the figures in the,
in the, for, in the New Zealand initiative submission,
the local government business forum,
which also made a submission on this bill has more detailed
information on growth and council spending
and rates, which do indicate that there is a bit
of a problem there that needs to be addressed.
Thank you. Okay,
well thank you very much for your time, Nick.
We appreciate it. Thank you.
We'll move on to our next submission, which will be from
Federated Farmers, and they should be joining us online
as well
turn, just turn your, uh, there we go.
Welcome. Got
Me. How are
You? Good, thank
you. We've got 10
minutes set aside for you guys.
So, uh, the floor's, yours,
I'll let you know when there's a minute to go.
You might like to leave time for questions.
Wonderful. Thank you very much for that.
And good morning all. Uh, for those that dunno me,
I'm Sandra Faulkner.
I'm the, a national board spokesperson
for Federated Farmers on local government.
Uh, and with me, I have Nigel Billings, who is our, um,
uh, local government specialist.
So, uh, there is, um,
after 25 plus years of working alongside local government,
there is very little that Nigel doesn't know.
So, um, we will work through our submission,
which hopefully you have, uh, before you there.
And, um, then just one short, um,
comment at the end on the rates peg, which we'll hand over
to Nigel to discuss.
So firstly, as a former counselor, uh, I come
to this discussion, uh,
with both a farming rate payers hat on
and having sat at the table
and understood the, uh, tensions involved with, uh,
delivering on, you know, the rates that are paid
to councils, particularly in a unitary authority
such as Gisborne.
So for us, what we see in this, uh, amendment
bill is a step in the right direction
for restoring confidence in local government.
Uh, I was very interested to hear the line
of questioning there about, um, I think from Mr. Wade Brown,
uh, around, uh, how local government responds
to the requirements of Central,
and I think Nick answered that very well.
So, um, what I would like to move on to is
what we believe, uh, is an excellent amendment,
but just a couple of suggestions.
So the first thing I believe, uh, in reading it is that,
uh, the need for this amendment bill was to address the cost
of living crisis.
And as a former counselor and as a raper farming raper.
Uh, whilst it sounds good, i i, in a real world,
I very much doubt that this is going
to change the rates bill for anybody anytime soon.
However, that said, uh, the need
for rates rises was very well transmitted, I believe.
And with this amendment bill,
we see those rates better spent,
and I think that's really important to remember.
So, uh, moving into refocusing the purpose
of local government, um, for us
and for farming rate payers, the need
to spend on great infrastructure never changes.
So for us, the need to get back to core services, uh,
is an absolute, uh, first port of call,
and we absolutely, uh, support the need
to remove the four wellbeings, which again,
as a former counselor, we spent an awful lot
of time debating, um, the intangibles, the immeasurables,
uh, and to be able to, um,
appoint funds to services
and infrastructure that can then be readily reported on,
I believe will make life for both management
and local governments and electeds
a lot more straightforward, uh,
for farming rate paths in particular.
Of course, a key part of that is
around the roading infrastructure.
Um, you know, like everybody else,
our rates bill has risen significantly,
and yet the deficit in local roading networks,
particularly in the more regional areas,
has been quite marked.
So what we have said in this space is
that it's very obvious to see
where the money needs to be spent.
But the other thing that we would like to note is
that there are a number of, uh, acts of parliament
and in particular, uh, biosecurity
and RMA, which also direct funding.
So we are thinking, you know, pest destruction and, uh,
and environmental consenting and the like.
So, so for the purposes of today, we're purely working
around or, or discussing those infrastructure
and services that are directly linked
to local councils.
One suggestion we would like to make, uh, is in the section
where you talk about,
or where there is discussion around recreation
for recreational facilities being part of that spend.
And we'd like to suggest the introduction
of a not-for-profit inclusion there.
So it becomes a not-for-profit regulat re uh,
recreational facility as compared to your, um,
profitable, profitable, uh, public private enterprises
where you've got your conference centers
and your big stadia and the like.
So nobody's going to argue
that those facilities are fantastic for a local community.
However, um, the requirement on local councils
to be responsible for that funding
and chasing down external funding, we believe is not ideal
and not a great use of council time.
So moving on to measuring and,
and, uh, publicizing the,
the transparency piece, if you like.
Uh, for, again, as a former counselor,
for me looking out across other councils, it would be
around standardized measure.
So you will always get an argument
that regional flavor makes it impossible to report on a, uh,
on any given metric.
However, if there was an opportunity
to work on standardized me measure, be it per kilometer
of unsealed road per hour, per
UAGC rate mem uh, rating rate payer just
to give you, uh, the opportunity to at least create
an apples for apples approach.
So that's, that's for that one.
And, um, on that note, and, and only
because I've sat through one, uh, much
as I believe the likes of, of Council Mark, you know,
LG N Z's council mark, and the like, uh, is well-meaning
and well intentioned, uh, having sat through one,
I've found it to be an inefficient, uh, use of
time and, uh,
and I think, uh, undue, uh, effort on behalf
of council management for,
for basically in discernible impact.
So, uh, it's that that was a, it was a,
a disappointing exercise, hence our need to step back
and understand how to standardize measures so that we can
make that so much clearer for both rate payers, uh,
and government central.
I believe. Um, in that vein,
um, there is always argument that, uh, councilors
should have more governance training that, uh,
that everything sits with them.
As we know, probably within this room, uh,
counselors are always guided by the recommendation
of their senior management teams, uh, and
therefore, um, the requirement for CEOs to make,
uh, all information available to their elected counselors,
whilst it sounds, uh, good, it, it,
it, it sounds like something
that they don't already have, they actually do.
There is, there is very,
that I believe an elected counselor could not ask
of their CEO and in good faith receive.
The thing is that as a counselor, a sitting counselor, uh,
you are asking to double your workload effectively.
Uh, it is a lot easier to sit
and allow management to come to you, uh, with, um,
the wildly expensive unaffordable option,
the status quo option, which nobody likes, uh,
because that's why you're debating it in the first place.
And the management option, which is recommended.
And, and, uh, unless you want to double your workload,
you'll just say yes to.
So that's me perhaps being slightly cynical, but,
but I think you would find that that's the case in defense.
One, in defense of CEOs, I believe
that information is available.
So following on, there is the note in this section
around the rates, pegs, I'm going to hand
to Nigel just very quickly
and let him speak to that very quickly.
Uh, thank you Sandra committee members.
I'm good to meet with you, and I'll be within that minute.
It's, it's rates pegs aren't within the bill, uh,
but they do feature in the explanatory note,
and we just wanted to put our hand up
and urge a little caution around that.
Like the, the notion
of pegging rates arbitrarily is very catchy.
Uh, but we know local government is very complex
and we feel that immediately a bureaucracy would need
to be established to work out carve outs and exceptions.
Councils will be coming
to Wellington looking for exceptions.
We worry about how the rates, rates peg would affect
core infrastructure, like the roading network
and another concern, a adverse events,
and the need for council to spend money on those.
And, and the challenges of the unfunded mandate
where central government delegate something like speed limit
changes, which cost new Plymouth more than a million bucks
altogether, that could also too soak up the roads pick.
So we just surging, of course, and we, we like the recipe
and the spill, and we think that's a good start, right?
Pizza to arbitrary. Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you. And thank you both for your time.
We are unfortunately out of time for questions,
but appreciate you, um, joining us this morning.
I certainly have A thank you very much
Discussion.
Thank, so have a good morning.
Cheers. We are gonna move on to the CTU, uh,
Sandra got 10 minutes.
I'll let you know when there's a minute to run
and you might like to leave time for questions.
The floor is yours. Thank
You, you chair. Uh,
marina. My name is Richard Wexer from the President
of the Council of Trade Unions.
And beside me is Jack Foster.
From our policy team, I'll make a few introductory comments.
The New Zealand Council of Trade Unions opposes this bill
by narrowing the purpose of local government.
The bill will restrict the exercise of local democracy
and the ability of councils to perform their roles,
not just in supporting economic development,
but also social connection,
environmental sustainability, and arts and culture.
The government argues the bill is necessary
to reduce pressure on rates which have increased
significantly in recent years.
The government has claiming that rates have increased due
to a lack of fiscal discipline,
and among councils, which it argues is driven
by spending on non-core services or nice to haves.
However, no data has or analysis has been
provided to demonstrate this is in fact, the case.
We remind the committee that local government act has been
continually amended over the past decade.
The chopping and changing is incredibly unhelpful,
and it needs to stop as the local, as the review
of local government noted in its 2023 report.
Councils will never be able to get on
and give full effect to their purpose if it is subject
to constant and regular change.
We encourage the government to develop a bipartisan
consensus in close consultation with local government
on the purpose of local government act so that the role
of local government is clear and lasting.
I'll now ask Jack to go into further into our submission.
Thank you, Richard. Thank you, chair.
Um, so I'm just, we make a number
of points in the submission, but, um,
and the remarks here,
I'm just gonna briefly elaborate on the question
of what's been driving rates increases.
Um, so as Richard noted, uh, the government hasn't
provided any evidence, um, to support the claim
that councils have been spending money on nice
to haves at the expense of the basics.
Um, so we look at the data on local government
operating expenditure.
Um, so the proportion
that goes towards roading water infrastructure and waste.
So the areas that, um, the new bill is defining
as core services has been very stable over the past decade.
If excessive spending on, um, on nice to haves
or non-core services was the problem,
we would expect the proportion of operating expenditure
that goes towards these core services to full.
Uh, but it hasn't, the data, it's not,
that's not visible in the data.
In addition, the 2024, um, data on capital expenditure, uh,
which is published on the DIA's website, shows
that most councils spent more than two thirds
of their capital expenditure on roading
or three waters infrastructure.
So neither the opex
or CapEx, um, data suggests
that councils have been drifting away from
delivering their core service.
What the data does indicate is
that rates increases are likely being driven
by the rising cost of delivering civil infrastructure.
So local government is responsible for around a quarter
of New Zealand's infrastructure portfolio.
And from 2020 to 2024, this period of high inflation,
we've recently lived through the cost
of building this infrastructure has really ballooned.
So overall civil construction costs increased 28%, the cost
of constructing roads, 26%, the cost of construction,
drainage and sewage systems, 32%,
and the cost of water supply systems 29%.
Now, if we look back further, we see the cost
of this infrastructure has been rising faster than consumer
inflation for some time.
These cost pressures have been intensified
by historic underinvestment that has been made,
particularly in the 1990s, uh, and our basic infrastructure
and this historic underinvestment is now creating very
expensive repair and renewal bills for councils.
So this is adding to the fiscal pressure they're under.
Looking to the future, local governments
around the country will continue
to face increasing fiscal pressures from this infrastructure
deficit, but also from growing populations,
increasingly complex social needs, uh,
and the challenges of climate change
and adaptation, changing the purpose of local government
as this bill does, and clearing the rate for rates capping,
uh, won't address these fiscal pressures.
Indeed, the government actively made these fiscal pressures
worse by ending the three waters legislation.
Policy decisions should be based on careful analysis
of the evidence and the evidence, uh, points clearly
to the rising cost of infrastructure as the main driver
of rising rates, not quote, a lack
of fiscal discipline from councils.
The government may have discovered this had it undertaken a
more robust policy process.
So the development of this legislation has been rushed
with little consultation taking place
beyond central government agencies.
So quoting from the DIA's, uh,
regulatory impact statement on this, um, on this bill,
the data and evidence used in carrying out this analysis was
generally low quality due
to limitations on options exploration and consultation.
So given this context, we encourage the committee
to reflect on the recommendation
of the productivity commission from its 2022
report on local government.
So I quote, central government agencies need
to significantly improve the quality
of their analysis when they're developing policies
and regulations that affect local government.
This will require better analysis of the problem
and the range of options fixing it, of
how things will be implemented on the ground,
what they'll cost, and how they'll be funded
and requires better consideration of the diversity
of council circumstances.
So we make another, uh, a number
of other points in our written submission,
but I'll, I'll leave our comments there.
Thank you very much.
Okay, thanks. Uh, I'm gonna start with questions. CDO,
Wade Brown. Thank
you. Um, nice to see you both.
I had a really a question about the way
that central government works with local government,
not about the particular services
that local government provides or the cost of those,
but in some countries, local government is really seen
as part of the constitutional arrangements for the country,
and therefore there is less flip flopping between,
um, central government telling local government what to do.
Do you think there's some, you were talking about a
bipartisan or hopefully multi partisan agreement for
that kind of constitutional,
um, role.
What would you, how would, how would you see a,
a government in the future trying to embed that, um,
constitutional place, local government?
Uh, I think it's a very good question.
I, I think the point that you're making is, is really,
I guess the point we're trying to make too, that that is,
that there should be, you know, it's a system of government,
local and central government or a system of government.
And I think what we can't have is, is a feeling
that they're not part of the same system,
and one is in fact, making the other part
more life more difficult.
And when we've said we, we think there needs
to be consensus, uh, sort of multi-party consensus
and close consultation with local government.
When we say close consultation,
we would really say in agreement if, if at all possible,
because there needs to be, you know, a whole
of system agreement on the, on change.
Clearly, um, things are becoming more
and more difficult for local government to deliver
what they feel needs to be delivered within sort of,
within the framework of, of what they have.
And, and I think, uh,
while we haven't thought about it too far about the
constitutional kind of arrangements,
we definitely do think there needs to be a bit of a reset
and a reconsideration of the obligations
and responsibilities of the different parts of government so
that they can properly act together to deliver what the
citizens of New Zealand expect.
Thank You. Um,
Thank you Chair. Um,
yes, thank you.
Look, um, you've talked about the fact that there's no data
or evidence or analysis to support.
What are some fundamental changes in this bill?
Para 42 of your submission paints the context
for the sector as it stands at the moment.
And this suggestion of a rates cap seems
to be along the frame of, of accountability as well.
So my question to you is what you see
as current accountability mechanisms that exist
to hold local decision making to account
to local communities?
Uh, so there, I mean, there's a, there's a variety of,
um, mechanisms.
So, uh, annual reports, um, financial reports, um, there is,
there has been, uh, better
or worse, um, central government data
collection practices in the past.
So note that, um, the government has restarted, um,
a time series collection of data on council, um,
capital expenditure, uh, be important
that that is maintained.
Um, but in general, I think we have, uh,
we do have relatively poor data collection practices
around local government spending.
Um, and it makes it difficult, um,
to compare across councils, uh, in particular
that can be difficult to see
where capital expenditure is going, um, at a very like,
uh, detailed level.
Yeah. So I'd say that starting with the, um,
with the data would be a, a good place. Okay,
Helpful.
Um, can I just ask a question?
Uh, in your submission, paragraph 10,
you talk about the massive inflation of costs between 2020
and 2023
and the impact that's had I not disputing, uh, that at all.
Um, and, and
therefore there is more spending required on
that core infrastructure, which was pa part
of your point in your submission,
but would you accept that there have been, uh,
there are examples, even if you don't have the full data of
spending that as pretty questionable for rate payers?
And I'm not going for the big convention centers, the,
you know, but, but things like, you know,
overspeed public toilets in my region, you know, bus stops
with gardens on the roof that cost $2 million, you know,
can, can you see that some things have gone too far?
So we wouldn't dispute that there can,
that there may be instances of spending that, um, some parts
of the community wouldn't see desirable.
I mean, we've got nearly 80 local
and regional councils across the country.
There's probably gonna be
questionable decisions made sometimes.
But the point is that with local democracy rate payers,
voters can hold, um, hold local government to account
for their spending decisions
through the process of an election.
Uh, so we don't think that central government needs
to come down and mandate what they can spend money on.
Okay. Well thanks for your time.
We are unfortunately out of time there
and we are gonna move now to ta, um,
but government
professionals welcome.
Uh, we've got 10 minutes for you, so, uh,
I'll let you know when there's minutes run.
Otherwise, all yours.
Thank you, chair, modern Tato, thank you
for the opportunity to discuss the bill.
Uh, my name is Joe Miller.
I'm the chief executive
of HU City Council just down the road
from you in Wellington.
But today here in my capacity as president
of tuda membership Association
of over a thousand people involved in local government, um,
represents the management and our role there is
to make local government the best it could be.
I'm a company by Raymond Torin, our chief advisor, our run
through some marks and very happy to tell questions.
Um, I've been president of URA for two years.
Uh, we have all 78 councils membership prior
to being HU City Council Chief Executive.
For the last six years I worked in the UK at a local,
regional, and national level
and have some, um, obligation there
around system improvement for local and government.
So, um, this is a bit of a subject in my heart.
If I start by looking at the change in the local government
purpose, um, there has been a bit
of a hokey cookie about this, if I may say so over a number
of years, you know, in, out, and you shake it all about.
Um, but the advice you've received is clear
as other submitters have identified, is the cost
of delivering network infrastructure's driven
rates in recent years.
Um, there will always be evidence of something somewhere
or other somebody is doing that's questionable at a central
and local, if I may be bold.
But there isn't evidence that there is, uh, systemically
a move of markedly different things.
For example, rates rises in my own council
have been higher over the last six years.
However, the amount
of network infrastructure we've replaced in water in the
last six years previously would've taken 30 years just
by way of example, as managers, our concern
with the change in purpose specifically relates
to the phrase most cost effecti for households and business.
Um, I'm clear we are clear
that cost effective isn't the most,
isn't synonymous with cheapest.
It's the lowest cost consistent with the objectives
for the decision, thinking about things like lifetime
costing, for example.
And a court won't be able
to reach a judgment about cost effective without having an
opinion on your objective.
So in our amendments, you can see that if you are minded
to hold onto this, um, clause, we suggest an amendment
that clarifies that it's the local author's objectives
provision of the infrastructure, uh, would help.
And we also note that communities consider far more than
households and businesses, uh,
clause sevens about core services
and our understanding, the government's upcoming
announcements about rate capping will target those services
that are outside the core
and hopefully rate capping will focus on smoothing of rates,
which I know is a concern.
Everybody, particularly in the moment when we
face the cost of living crisis.
Defining cost services is always going to raise issues
around the margins.
For example, why museums included in the list,
but not art galleries.
What we're concerned about is the encouragement
of risk aversion and,
and that we'll see councils coming to more parliament
with more requests for empowering legislation.
And also that the list doesn't align well
with the proposed statement of purpose.
For example, there's no mention
of a regulatory services in clause seven, yet it's one
of the stated functions in the purpose statement.
There's no mention of economic development
yet it appears the purpose statement.
Sanitary services are missing altogether
and the de definition of CDE doesn't have to avoid
or mitigate crisis, yet we know that the cost
of avoiding a crisis and emergency is much cheaper than
picking it up afterwards.
Yep. Uh, our preference is
that we delete this clause seven altogether,
but if it's not, it does need significant technical
alignment to make it work with the statement of purpose.
Um, I'd also point out that the purpose clause
and the core services clause takes the effect the day
after Royal Ascent,
but we can't just exit services at the drop of a hat.
There are employment obligations as statutory processes
for amending ltps.
So we'd recommend that you delay these
to the 1st of July, 2027 to allow councils
to make changes through their next long-term plan.
Uh, the bill provides the department of DIA department
to provide further mandatory measures
of non-financial performance
and to make regulations around
how local authorities group their service, their services
for reporting purposes.
You know, DIA currently collects
around 300 performance measures,
and when you ask them what they do with it,
the answer is nothing for most of them.
So there's a whole heap of data that's currently collected
that, particularly using things like ai,
we could really make a bit more sense of these days.
So our wide exper, our experience with the current set
of measures is they're not widely used by the public.
We don't want to incentivize activity for its own sake.
And of course, others require investment in systems
to collate and report.
I'm a fan of transparency and data.
We use it in our own council to drive decision making.
Um, we just need to understand
that collecting numbers is measure, is, is, is a measure.
It's not performance improvement.
There's something a bit more sophisticated
that needs to go with that.
And we'd suggest that Parliament should be interested in
pursuing performance improvement across the whole system
of government, including local government.
And we have got an offer to make,
to make that what it really means.
Finally, um, I should mention clause 25 with the amendment
around reappointing chief executives.
We support this, we simply suggest some transitionary
provisions to ensure that those
who are currently in the term, uh, are, are,
are basically allowed, are able to complete, uh, their role
to fit the new provision.
And we conclude our, um, opening statement again
by reminding you that we have 78 councils
and over 11,000 members who we can draw on,
and we have drawn on in both putting this submission
together and supporting the committee
as it considers the bill
and are very happily take your questions chair.
Thank you. Uh, Andy Foster, then Tony.
Joe, nice to see you. Um, Raymond too.
Um, look, a couple of questions if the can, the first one
of 'em is just in terms of, um, how do, first thing is
how do we apply some greater discipline to councils without,
um, adversely affecting their
ability to do what they need to do?
And you said specifically that you'd done in Hut City, uh,
30, what what would've usually taken you 30 years worth of,
um, of wa work on water in six years?
Also, thinking about how we actually have really good
long-term asset management plans
and councils are held accountable for them.
You, you asked about, you said
DIA collects lots of information.
I would say audit office.
We've had them in here and they've said they, um, you know,
they've looked at everybody, every council
and said, oh, you are all under investing.
And then done absolutely nothing with that either.
Uh, so, um, really combination of
how do you actually apply some discipline,
but also make sure
that there are some good robust asset management plans
to which councils are held to account.
Andy, it's nice to see you again.
And we've had these conversations in a former role.
You been, uh, look, if you think of how much we spend
on long-term plan consultation, long-term plans,
collecting data, the audit that, um, OHE
and others do, we spend a whole heap of money on that,
but it's not getting to the heart of what's there.
And I think we need a much wider overhaul of the system, um,
that is data, data-driven.
That that also puts in some realistic expectations.
You know, and I know
that rates were at their very lowest in the nineties,
and as I, I know some of the issues that we're facing
by central government Minister Bishop indicated
that when we were, he was here a couple of weeks ago,
I think we need to revisit the whole system,
have proper plans, proper data across the whole,
and that does expect some smoothing of rates so
that households
and businesses aren't faced with a giant lump in one go.
Mm-hmm. Um, you know, that we acknowledge here, for example,
that our rates have gone up significantly.
Uh, we're just slightly above the average this year,
but our infrastructure was at the end of its life.
What did we do? You know, what do we do?
Do we, do we leave it to fail?
So I think there is a wider systems overhaul
that I don't think would cost any more money than it
currently does, but we need to stop doing some things.
If I can pick up a couple of points there too.
Um, you're quite right.
Sorry, just in the, in the, sorry.
Just in the interest of time,
I'll just give Tanya security the last minute.
Thank. Unless you want to
That, Steve. Um, my mine's
a really quick question. Um, thank you Chair.
Um, thank, thank you, Joe. Good to see you again.
Um, my question is around your recommendation
around the interface with, uh, mayoral powers under, uh,
section 41 A.
Could, could you just touch on that briefly?
Is, is that sort of checking that there is some alignment
or try to mitigate misalignment between the exercise of
that section and the governance's process?
I'll pass that straight to Raymond if I,
if I may. And it's lovely to see you.
Um, uh, thank you. Uh, thank you Joe. Um, good question.
Um, section 41 A is
effectively gives the mayor leadership role, um,
in driving policy development within the council.
Um, we're just concerned that, that, um,
there will be a mismatch in, in what the mere expects, given
what section 41 A says
and what the new governance principles say in terms of
group determination of agendas and so on.
Um, so you should probably, uh,
our recommendation is that you, you ask the department
to further consider
or identify why they explain effectively why they
don't consider there is any misalignment.
Okay. Thanks Raymond. Thank you. Thank
You. And sorry, slightly over
time there,
but appreciate your time.
Um, sorry. We've run out.
We are gonna move to the, uh,
parliamentary commissioner for the environment.
Uh, welcome. Uh, as I'm sure you're aware,
10 minutes for your submission.
I'll let you know when there's a minute
to run. It's all yours.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, this bill seeks
to amend an important act,
but it's frankly, already complex to follow.
Uh, it amends section three,
which spells out the purpose of the act.
Then it amends section 10, which spells out the purpose
of local government.
Then it amends section 11, which spells out the role
of a local authority giving effect to Section 10.
And then having amended those three clauses, it seeks
to add a new Section 11 A, which provides,
let's just work it through the all of those amendments.
A local authority in performing its role
as a local authority to give effect to the purpose
of local government to fulfill the purpose of the act
must have particular regard
to a shopping list of core services.
It starts to get a bit like the rhyme about the
house that Jack built.
If it's so important to spell out these core services,
I'd just like to suggest to you that many
of the tasks lumped onto local authorities
by other statutes are just as core
as the list you're proposing.
Now, as PCE, I have to spend a lot of time talking
to local authorities
and in particular regional councils
about the tasks successive governments have given
to them to do.
Now, the implementation
of environmental policy in New Zealand
is largely in local government hands
under central government direction, not just
as PCE, but as a rate payer.
I consider that dealing with, say, biosecurity
or natural hazards is every bit as much a core service
as providing recreational facilities,
which found their way into the list.
Now, central governments very good at coming up
with policies and then leaving local authorities
to implement them often without financial assistance.
Many citizens have absolutely no idea
that things they see local authorities doing are mandated
by central government.
For instance, we're onto our fourth edition of
National Policy Direction on freshwater
management in 15 years.
Now. I went to a meet the candidates meeting in my local war
Memorial Hall a week or so ago.
Good. I think the hall might have come under
recreational, but maybe not.
It's not a museum. And listened
to people dumping on councilors for implementing policies,
many of which had emanated from Wellington.
Now section 11 a cuts across the unchanged purpose
of local government set out in Section 10 A, which is,
quote, to enable democratic local decision making by
and on behalf of communities.
We're getting to the point
or we're getting, we're in danger of getting to the point
where local authorities and citizens are on time
to ask whether central government is
enabling democratic local decision making
or tying it in knots.
As you'll know from my written submission, I think changes
of this nature should await the passage of proposed changes
to resource management legislation.
'cause I think these are inevitably gonna affect the roles
and responsibilities of local authorities.
But if you can't wait, then I think the committee should at
the very least, insist that the many roles
and responsibilities imposed on councils
by central government are every bit as core
as the list that's proposed.
And you should put that into section 11 A to make it clear
that those other functions, which they're required to do,
are also core
or better still, I think you could ask officials
to investigate the well-considered proposal
of the New Zealand initiative
and replace the clause with
what they term a prioritization framework
that would represent a much more serious reform.
Again, I'd recommend leaving a decision
until you can see the shape
of the resource management reforms.
Now, I'll stop there. I have my general counsel with me
and my chief policy advisor.
Um, if you've got some questions,
we'd be happy to answer them. Thank you. That's silly
Way, Brad. Yes.
I'm just focusing on the environmental,
um, responsibilities. That's
My job. Yeah, so,
so for, for both, um, district city
regional unitary, um, often their environmental work goes to
advising and supporting.
It might be on-farm environmental plans.
It might be, um, community planting, it might be
nurseries and so on.
The current list of what they can
and can't do seems very focused on their own reserves
rather than looking on a, a catchment basis
or across the whole community.
Do you think that, um, this is too constraining
for looking at whether it's predic to control
or planting or weed control?
Well, I think it is. It, there are the,
the statutory re responsibilities remain there, whether
or not you put them in that list.
So whether it's constraining
or not, um, uh, I think you might better ask a lawyer there,
but can, no, can I just make this point what you raised?
This is a perfectly reasonable 'cause.
I'm dealing with regional councils more than TLAs.
They're asked to look after soil or water.
They're encouraged not
to use compulsory regulatory means they to work
with community groups, go out there and do things.
I'm, how can they do this if, if they're constrained just
to look at their own reserves?
So obviously that's something they should do.
Um, would you like to comment on the, the law of that? Sure.
Whether they're constrained, but the high court has
confirmed the predicament that councils are facing.
And from that judgment, they acknowledge
that while prioritizing activities based on o limited
resources is understandable, it does not mean
that local authorities can derogate from the statutory
duties imposed by parliament
and the RMA in that particular case, ELI
and environment, self and laws in RMA specific case,
what it does, rather than constrain
and, uh, prescribe matters, which councils cannot consider.
It essentially sets out a prioritization process then,
which then constrains their ability
to make decisions based on the needs of their community.
Which, as Simon's pointed out, really is at heart
of the part of the purpose of the local government,
which is not being changed by this bill,
which is the Democratic decision making at a local level.
It also denies communities the ability to have a say in
how those funds are being spent.
Thank you.
Can I ask you, sir,
just a quick question about your point about the other
statutory obligations that could be folded into part 11
or the prioritization framework.
I've heard some councils, um,
in their public meetings talking about the bill saying,
well, we've actually got all these other responsibilities.
We can kind of bypass the core services
list and do whatever we want.
Do you think there's a risk that either extra stuff
that maybe they shouldn't be focusing on gets snuck in,
or that really important stuff gets missed
in the current one?
Or if there was a priority framework, could you just, uh,
expand on that a little bit more?
Well, the idea of a prioritization framework was
from the New Zealand initiative.
And I haven't done, I haven't done detailed work on that,
but it did seem to me it was a much more grown up
serious way of thinking about this.
If you are worried about what local government does,
then thinking about it more conceptually than trying
to come up with a shopping list seem
to me to be a better way to go.
I can't answer your question as
to whether things will get missed or snuck in.
Um, I don't think Parliament, as a matter
of good legislative practice should be coming up with law,
which leaves people wondering what,
what you've done as erected.
What you're proposing to do is to erect a, a special list
of things that they have to have, give particular regard to.
But through in this other statutes, you've told them,
you must do this, you must do that.
You must do that. They've got, they're left with having
to put that together.
Surely parliament's job is to legislate clearly.
Yeah, that makes sense. Last minute, Andy Foster. Yeah,
Look, um, one of the things we've got there in terms
of core services, um, list of them,
what we haven't said in any of the any of that is
how much of any of those courses?
Yeah. Any co any comment on that?
Well, I, again, I'd come back to to to 10 A,
which is enabling democratic local decision making by
and on behalf of communities.
'cause I just don't think you can spell out from the
center, uh, everything.
Mm. Um, and either we have a system
where we think only central government can know stuff
and you direct everything, which is
what we've got into in the environment.
I have to say, there's a lot of
central government direction.
Regional councils are being asked
to implement central government policy.
They get all the flack, the government comes up
with a policy, you know, if you really believe in
that, blame the RMA.
Yeah. And indeed, indeed, no, it's at the heart
of the RMA is a very hierarchical top down system.
And what this bill, it's very much of a piece with it.
It's, it's continuing this top down approach.
If you've got any confidence in subsidiarity,
any confidence in the localism
and whatever you'd say, listen,
we can't make all those choices from here.
All I, but, um, all I'm saying to you is that,
that you've come up with a, a list of four things I'm saying
to you from where I stand as commissioner, a huge amount
of local government workers devote to the environment.
Uh, you, you, you've gotta reflect
that in your list somewhere or another.
Uh, it, it, it really is a very thread bear list.
Thank you very much for your,
for your time and for joining us this morning.
Pleasure. We're gonna move back online now
for economic development New Zealand.
Thank you.
Okay. It's a big room. Uh, welcome.
We have got, uh, 10 minutes. Here we go.
Uh, want 10 minutes for your submission?
I'll let you know when there's a minute to run.
Uh, the floor is yours.
Thank you. Good morning everybody.
Um, coming to you from, um, as, as a bit
of quick introduction to economic develop in New Zealand.
I'm the chair of that organization.
We represent all economic development agencies
and over 85% of, uh, economic development groups
that we are delivering that function within councils.
Um, so we think we have a,
a reasonably strong membership base
and speak confidently On behalf of our heads,
I just wanna highlight a couple things and,
and then leave some time for questions.
Um, we commend the government's broader goals
to grow New Zealand's economy, including ambitious ambitions
to double exports, um,
particularly in the primary sector and tourism.
Um, we note the government's emphasis on engaging in a
regional level with coordinated groupings.
And this aligns with a critical role
that regional economic development plays in driving
productivity, resilience, and sustainable growth.
Clarity, stability
and accountability are essential
to unlock the full potential
of New Zealand's regional economic development system.
At present, fragmentation
and inconsistent approaches across regions create
unnecessary advocacy, burdens, duplication,
and lost opportunities for collaboration.
Without sufficient sufficient clarity, there is a risk
that the bill could inadvertently narrow even further.
The scope of lung gut responsibilities diminishing its
ability to act as a partner with central government
are critical matters of regional national economic growth.
So hollow out the government's ability
to engage meaningfully at the regional level
to achieve its economic aspirations.
We spend a significant part of our three year roles
with new local government, uh, politicians,
engaging them on the knowledge, value
and importance of economic development.
Probably say we lose almost a year in the course of
that space, consistently
around the country upskilling them on that role
and function, which is largely why when we asked
for some really specific things, we talk about the value
and importance of a definition of economic development,
some consistency around
that across the country would be credibly valuable.
And we'd really want
to recognize the role local government has in supporting
economic development actually make that core statement
to support regional economic development.
And I guess ideally embedding a clear definition
and explicit purpose
for regional economic development within the legislation
would really help ensure
that New Zealand's regions can contribute effectively
international goals of prosperity, resilience, and growth.
That's really what I wanted to highlight in
terms of our submission.
Uh, and I wanted to make sure I left sufficient time
for any questions members may have.
Thank you. Uh, see you wave back. Thank you.
Um, thank you for your submission
focusing on the economic development areas.
Um, I have a concern,
and I'd like to hear your viewpoint on it, about the,
some councils, but not all councils
and it's quite variable, um, contribute
to their regional tourism organizations.
And I do you feel that it is unclear
with this systems improvement bill whether councils would
be able to continue their contributions to
regional tourism organizations now for this time?
I've got a follow up question.
Uh, yeah. Quite simply for me it's really unclear.
It probably actually almost borders on the opposite
of saying the, the simple reading of it suggests
that councils need to, to focus on economic development
that affects their core activities
and tourism does not appear to be listed as a core activity.
Thank you. Um, my
and my question, second question, if Chair would ask.
Yes. Yes. We a minute, um, really goes to,
um, convention centers.
Um, have you got any examples where the private sector,
rather than local
or central government would ever, um,
provide a convention center
or whether you think that's a valid, um, use
of rates and borrowing?
Right.
Uh, uh, yes, there are examples around the country
where the privacy sector contributes to those.
Those, and I can follow, I can follow up further,
further information if you want it.
It's a difficult question to answer
'cause there is a role for local communities to support
conference and events type activities, particularly
where those things benefit them, their communities.
I think there's a, there's significant opportunity
for genuine partnership between local government
and private sector around delivering those, um,
and essentially making them cost neutral.
Thank you. Thank you.
And thank you very much for your time, uh, joining us today.
Really grateful. We are going to move
to our final submission online, which is Auckland Council.
Thank you. Thank you.
Just give a minute to pop up,
uh, morning.
And welcome. We have got 10 minutes for your submission.
I'll let you know when there's a minute to go.
And just so we are clear at this end,
you are speaking. Sorry, he's not
Able to see you. He's just said
That's lovely as it is.
Yeah. He's got a much better view. I'm sure.
Um, he, uh, that was a compliment
for you by the way, silly. No doubt.
Thank you. I've stored it up.
Um, and I think you're speaking on behalf
of elected members or the council itself.
I'll let you explain, but um,
if you can just cover off in
your introduction, that'd be great.
Otherwise, the floor's all yours,
Uh, qua chair, Costley
and Koto, um, to the committee members.
Um, morning and thank you.
Um, I will just say that, um, I think it says a, a bit of,
sends a bit of a message that these select committee
hearings on this bill are during our last week of elections.
But I'll just leave that there.
Um, the Auckland Council opposes this bill, so 18 of us, uh,
oppose this bill.
Only one counselor, um, did not wanna oppose the bill.
And two councilors, councilor Fletcher
and Turner, um, decided to abstain.
Um, the mayor's view, um, was pretty strong on this.
We are working with the government right now in a city deal.
I personally have been working really well with, uh,
minister Bishop and Minister Pink on different issues
including transport and planning.
And this, uh, bill did not discuss, um,
no one discussed this bill with us or what's in it.
We feel like it's a really poor way to treat us
as a partner in a relationship.
Um, we're obviously extremely diverse, um, city.
We have a lot of, um, things going on for us.
We've also got a lot of issues
and challenges we need to address.
And we don't think this bill addresses that at all.
Um, we oppose the bill in its entirety.
We don't believe there has been a good reason, reason
for the removal of the four aspects of the wellbeings.
Um, why they would be removed. We're not sure.
Um, the proposed statement does not accurately describe the
role of local government or its
relationship with local communities.
It also doesn't acknowledge
that Auckland Council has its own legislation
and quite a separate, um,
case from the rest of local government.
Um, it does not give us the ability to determine
how we deliver services or what our communities want.
It is actually the opposite of localism.
Um, there's little evidence that this will help Iwi and Hapu
or any, um,
specific communities better our rural communities on the
list of core services.
It doesn't include regulatory functions,
which are extremely important
and required of us, does not include animal management,
which is, as you know, a massive issue.
We had to add five
and a half million dollars to our animal management budget
last year due to massive issues, um, across the city.
Doesn't include resource management,
doesn't include environmental protection or enhancement.
Um, one of the biggest issues in my ward on the
North Shore is water quality.
Um, the bill includes nothing on water
quality flood protection.
We are spending over a billion dollars, uh,
in partnership with the government.
And we thank you, um, for a billion dollars as well.
Buying out homes and dealing with flood protection.
The bill does not include anything to do
with climate adaptation mitigation, um,
and that significant amount
of flood management we're doing right now.
Um, even the waste management doesn't
include waste minimization.
There's nothing about events
or culture activities or the arts.
I'm not sure if the government is suddenly gonna start
funding all our stadiums.
Um, the zoo, our theaters, um, with the mps
who turn up to our Anzac days, siki events,
Chinese New Year events, du events, Christmas events, um,
we welcome mps of all parties to all of those,
but apparently we won't be able to fund those.
So I'm, I'm not sure if the government will start funding
those sports facilities are not included, both the capital
and the, the help for clubs lighting.
Um, also we're having
to a hundred percent fund things like footpaths
because the GPS undercut, um, footpaths walking
and cycling quite significantly, um, for Auckland.
So as you can imagine them, the mayor, um, was not impressed
with this direction and neither is the
council on transparency.
Uh, we believe we already provide pretty high transparency
for, um, we have to have a fully audited
and fully balanced budget that the government does not, um,
need to, we have
to have asset management plans of all our assets.
Government does not need to do that.
Um, we are proactive already on publishing information on
contractor and cons, consult, um, consultants spend.
Um, and our elected members have access
to all the information they need.
The, we also have to consult on a budget.
So we have to spend six months consulting,
whereas governments red
or blue, um,
can pass a budget essentially within days of announcing it.
Um, we have, I think every budget that I've been a part
of has had strong support through submissions.
Um, we opposed the proposed standardized codes
of conduct and standing orders.
The mayor did offer during our committee meeting
that he could write your code of conduct if you are going
to write ours.
Um,
the think that is about it.
Oh, we also opposed the removal of Tik KGA in our interviews
for, um, CCOs.
We have no idea what what's that's got to do anything, uh,
and why that would be in here.
Um, yeah, I think my personal view is this
is pretty paternalistic.
Um, quite, um, it's really disappointing
and I don't think it reflects
what our communities want at all.
And on the rates capping situation, um, I think it's trying
to relate to the Australian government situation.
Uh, councils, which gets significant funding from the state
governments and central governments operating funding,
massive capital funding.
I mean we are funding half the
things like the city rail link in our,
in our transport budgets.
But our biggest increases in, uh, rates and spending
and debt have been for when I've been here nine years,
we quadrupled our water spend.
We've more than tripled our transport spend.
And that's been the biggest amount of, um, funding
that we've needed to do.
It's not on, um, other issues,
but I can leave it up to, um, questions now.
But I do know the mayor said we're happy
to start again on this and work with you on, um, you know,
responding to community and responding to
what the government wants or we think this way is not the
way to do it for something so significant.
Thank you. Sounds like you guys are awesome.
So I'll give the first question to Tom.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Just a question.
Which government has passed a budget
within a couple of days?
Well, I mean, I mean you have the power.
You don't need to consult with anyone.
A government can pass the budget under urgency.
Um, we have to consult with our communities
and we have to get submissions.
We have to go through, um, we have to vote on it
and then it needs to go to audit New Zealand
for a full, uh, look at.
And then it comes back to it and we vote on, again,
what I'm saying is the government is requiring, um,
significant amounts of, uh, transparency that we already,
um, do when a government doesn't have to do the same.
And just on the, uh, earlier part of your submission,
you made a comment around the timing
of you presenting the submission to the committee
and then amongst local body elections.
Should governments not, uh, have any legislation
or anything that sort of takes place around the time
that uh, local body, uh, local government goes
through the council elections?
So hypothetically, sort of six months
between the three months
before the election, the interregnum and then the period
after the elections?
No, absolutely not. You guys should be doing, um,
legislation all the time.
But I think something that so significantly affects local
government as it's a local government amendment
that when local government members are literally in their
last week of campaign, it is an interesting thing
to have it up so close.
And once again, to the mayor's point
that it would've been awesome
'cause we are working really well with many, uh, ministers
and the government on things like city deals.
Feels like transport, you know, worked really well
with councilor, uh,
sorry Minister Bishop on our planning rules.
Um, but to have such a massive change come
to us without discussions
and then have the select committee on the week, um, when,
you know, um, we are pretty busy.
Um, I would've thought if it was a couple, a month
or two ago, or maybe for the new council to, to work on, um,
such a significant change.
That was just my comment that it was, um,
we only got notice two days ago that this was on.
Okay. Um, Melissa Lee, well, hello Richard. Good.
If I, if you were to prioritize the core services
that council provides, what would be your top three?
Uh, yeah, I mean we already prioritize every day,
but it depends on the community.
I mean, in some communities it's environment, water quality,
and other communities it's transport and housing.
But if you were to prioritize three top things
as a counselor for Auckland, what would be the top three?
Um, well I always prioritize
depending on what the community wants.
And that's my point. So definitely things like transport
environment, water quality, but the list would go on.
You can't live without animal management.
You can't live without public.
Did rates increase actually become part of your, uh,
priority considering the fact
that Auckland rates has increased close to 6% for next year?
Yeah, so, um, the increase
for next year is largely about the $200 million increase
with the depreciation and opex on the city rail link.
And that will be also an increase for the government.
I mean, we have the, had the lowest rate rises
of almost any council, um,
in New Zealand in the last three years,
we've saved $600 million as, uh, Desley Simpson, uh,
through her committee has put out there very. Um, but that
Wasn't your priority in the top three.
It's always a priority. Um, so you said services.
So rates are not a service.
They're how 35% of the revenues that come in to pay
for what Auckland is one,
I say prioritize the top three items. Yep.
And so rates will be a big priority as part
of the system we pay for,
but um, we are always trying to keep that down.
But in 2023 for instance,
there were significant cuts put forward
and Auckland has asked, 70% of Auckland has said
that they would prefer to pay higher rates than have
cuts to environment.
CAB culture, arts, sports libraries.
This was one of the biggest cons consultations we've had
and that's why we put up the, the rate slightly.
But we have been making significant savings,
including almost 600 million this term as, um,
councilor Deputy Mayor Simpson has made clear
that her leadership on that has been pretty significant.
But we do have issues with inflation,
just like the government does.
But the government, you know, we, last year
the average household paid an extra $223 in rates.
But if you had an average household
that had the average wage increase,
they would've paid about $1,500 extra N-P-A-Y-E.
But they didn't, the government
doesn't need to consult on that.
So we are trying to keep rates down,
but we also know that Auckland is, expect us
to be funding the water, the transport,
and the activities that they need.
The libraries, the 56 libraries, we have the parks
and services, the everything,
and people submit very clearly.
If they submit it very clearly, they don't want us
to do something, we then review what we are doing and try
and reduce, um, that,
So every counselor comes
with priorities from their own community.
They may, as you say, have different priorities.
So how does council come up with the top three,
for example, let's say,
Well, the top three, I mean, if you're thinking,
I'm not suggesting that's the only thing that you do,
but, you know, top three pieces of work, the priority
for the council to deliver for the community.
If every counselor, every, you know, um,
local board has different priorities,
how do we actually deliver for the people?
Yeah. Well I mean we have,
each community has hundreds of priorities.
That's why we have local boards.
That's why we have communities that are set up.
I mean, this term, the priorities have been dealing
with working with the government on things like the flood
mitigation and buying 1200 homes that we didn't, you know,
prepare for if we'd kept the rates
and we probably wouldn't have been able to do, um,
the buyouts or the flood protection working in partnership.
Thank you to the government, um, for, for continuing that.
And I've been working really closely with Minister Watts
and um, Dan on that as well.
And, and my community because it is a partnership
between government and we just want these
partnerships to continue.
We want good, um, relationships with government
and I think this bill doesn't do that,
but there are lots of things we could be doing.
Savings, transport reform, what you guys are allowing us
to do is significant
and there should be savings through that,
but we may not know what they look like until we get the,
the next six months under our belt.
Just, just a really quick one to finish
'cause we're right on time, but, um,
just your comment at the start about civil defense
and some of the mitigation, uh, measures.
'cause this came up from another submitter.
Are you aware that the definition in the act
specifically says it includes measures
and practices, um, necessary, um, for the safety of public
and prop property and also, um, measures
and practices designed to guard against, prevent
and reduce any hazard
or harm that could be associated with an emergency.
So it, it does actually include that preventative stuff.
Um, does that include, does that include coastal assets
and flood prevention, tree planting, rain gardens?
It's, it's any, it's any, um, it's anything in your,
in your region of interest in this case.
So for, for, for your council coastline as well.
Okay, that's good then. Okay, great. Just checking.
There's nothing else. Um, with that, we're gonna finish
and move into subcommittees.
Um, just before we do. Thank you.
Um, uh, one thing
technically in private, um.